Stoicism is a school of Hellenistic philosophy founded by Zeno of Citium in Athens in the early 3rd century BC. Stoicism is a philosophy of personal ethics informed by its system of logic and its views on the natural world. According to its teachings, as social beings, the path to eudaimonia (happiness) for humans is found in accepting the moment as it presents itself, by not allowing oneself to be controlled by the desire for pleasure or fear of pain, by using one's mind to understand the world and to do one's part in nature's plan, and by working together and treating others fairly and justly.

The Stoics are especially known for teaching that "virtue is the only good" for human beings, and that external things—such as health, wealth, and pleasure—are not good or bad in themselves (adiaphora), but have value as "material for virtue to act upon". Alongside Aristotelian ethics, the Stoic tradition forms one of the major founding approaches to Western virtue ethics.[1] The Stoics also held that certain destructive emotions resulted from errors of judgment, and they believed people should aim to maintain a will (called prohairesis) that is "in accord with nature". Because of this, the Stoics thought the best indication of an individual's philosophy was not what a person said, but how a person behaved.[2] To live a good life, one had to understand the rules of the natural order since they thought everything was rooted in nature.

Many Stoics—such as Seneca and Epictetus—emphasized that because "virtue is sufficient for happiness", a sage would be emotionally resilient to misfortune. This belief is similar to the meaning of the phrase "stoic calm", though the phrase does not include the "radical ethical" Stoic views that only a sage can be considered truly free, and that all moral corruptions are equally vicious.[3]

Stoicism flourished throughout the Roman and Greek world until the 3rd century AD, and among its adherents was Emperor Marcus Aurelius. It experienced a decline after Christianity became the state religion in the 4th century AD. Since then it has seen revivals, notably in the Renaissance (Neostoicism) and in the contemporary era (modern Stoicism).[4]

Stoicism was originally known as ‘Zenonism’, after the founder Zeno of Citium. However this name was soon dropped, likely because the Stoics did not consider their founders to be perfectly wise, and to avoid the risk of the philosophy becoming a cult of personality.[5]

The name 'Stoicism' derives from the Stoa Poikile (Ancient Greek: ἡ ποικίλη στοά), or ‘Painted Porch’, a colonnade decorated with mythic and historical battle scenes, on the north side of the Agora in Athens, where Zeno and his followers gathered to discuss their ideas.[6][7] When Zeno first started teaching, he could not afford a building such as Plato’s Academy or Aristotle’s Lyceum, so he and his followers gathered under the shade of the Stoa Poikile in the marketplace, where anyone could listen and join in the debate.[8]

Sometimes Stoicism is therefore referred to as just ‘The Stoa’, or the philosophy of ‘The Porch

The Stoics provided a unified account of the world, consisting of formal logic, monistic physics and naturalistic ethics. Of these, they emphasized ethics as the main focus of human knowledge, though their logical theories were of more interest for later philosophers.

Stoicism teaches the development of self-control and fortitude as a means of overcoming destructive emotions; the philosophy holds that becoming a clear and unbiased thinker allows one to understand the universal reason (logos). A primary aspect of Stoicism involves improving the individual's ethical and moral well-being: "Virtue consists in a will that is in agreement with Nature."[9] This principle also applies to the realm of interpersonal relationships; "to be free from anger, envy, and jealousy,"[10] and to accept even slaves as "equals of other men, because all men alike are products of nature".[11]

The Stoic ethic espouses a deterministic perspective; in regard to those who lack Stoic virtue, Cleanthes once opined that the wicked man is "like a dog tied to a cart, and compelled to go wherever it goes".[9] A Stoic of virtue, by contrast, would amend his will to suit the world and remain, in the words of Epictetus, "sick and yet happy, in peril and yet happy, dying and yet happy, in exile and happy, in disgrace and happy,"[10] thus positing a "completely autonomous" individual will, and at the same time a universe that is "a rigidly deterministic single whole". This viewpoint was later described as "Classical Pantheism" (and was adopted by Dutch philosopher Baruch Spinoza)

Stoicism became the foremost popular philosophy among the educated elite in the Hellenistic world and the Roman Empire,[13] to the point where, in the words of Gilbert Murray "nearly all the successors of Alexander [...] professed themselves Stoics."[14]

Beginning around 301 BC, Zeno taught philosophy at the Stoa Poikile ("Painted Porch"), from which his philosophy got its name.[15] Unlike the other schools of philosophy, such as the Epicureans, Zeno chose to teach his philosophy in a public space, which was a colonnade overlooking the central gathering place of Athens, the Agora.

Zeno's ideas developed from those of the Cynics, whose founding father, Antisthenes, had been a disciple of Socrates. Zeno's most influential follower was Chrysippus, who was responsible for the molding of what is now called Stoicism. Later Roman Stoics focused on promoting a life in harmony within the universe, over which one has no direct control.


Bust of Seneca
Scholars usually divide the history of Stoicism into three phases:

Early Stoa, from the founding of the school by Zeno to Antipater.
Middle Stoa, including Panaetius and Posidonius.
Late Stoa, including Musonius Rufus, Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius.
No complete work by any Stoic philosopher survives from the first two phases of Stoicism. Only Roman texts from the Late Stoa survive.

Diodorus Cronus, who was one of Zeno's teachers, is considered the philosopher who first introduced and developed an approach to logic now known as propositional logic, which is based on statements or propositions, rather than terms, making it very different from Aristotle's term logic. Later, Chrysippus developed a system that became known as Stoic logic and included a deductive system, Stoic Syllogistic, which was considered a rival to Aristotle's Syllogistic (see Syllogism). New interest in Stoic logic came in the 20th century, when important developments in logic were based on propositional logic. Susanne Bobzien wrote, "The many close similarities between Chrysippus' philosophical logic and that of Gottlob Frege are especially striking."[17]

Bobzien also notes that "Chrysippus wrote over 300 books on logic, on virtually any topic logic today concerns itself with, including speech act theory, sentence analysis, singular and plural expressions, types of predicates, indexicals, existential propositions, sentential connectives, negations, disjunctions, conditionals, logical consequence, valid argument forms, theory of deduction, propositional logic, modal logic, tense logic, epistemic logic, logic of suppositions, logic of imperatives, ambiguity and logical paradoxes.

The Stoics held that all being (ὄντα) – though not all things (τινά) – is material. They accepted the distinction between Abstract and concrete bodies, but rejected Aristotle's belief that purely incorporeal being exists. Thus, they accepted Anaxagoras' idea (as did Aristotle) that if an object is hot, it is because some part of a universal heat body had entered the object. But, unlike Aristotle, they extended the idea to cover all accidents. Thus if an object is red, it would be because some part of a universal red body had entered the object.

They held that there were four categories.

substance (ὑποκείμενον)
The primary matter, formless substance, (ousia) that things are made of
quality (ποιόν)
The way matter is organized to form an individual object; in Stoic physics, a physical ingredient (pneuma: air or breath), which informs the matter
somehow disposed (πως ἔχον)
Particular characteristics, not present within the object, such as size, shape, action, and posture
“	Make for yourself a definition or description of the thing which is presented to you, so as to see distinctly what kind of a thing it is in its substance, in its nudity, in its complete entirety, and tell yourself its proper name, and the names of the things of which it has been compounded, and into which it will be resolved. For nothing is so productive of elevation of mind as to be able to examine methodically and truly every object that is presented to you in life, and always to look at things so as to see at the same time what kind of universe this is, and what kind of use everything performs in it, and what value everything has with reference to the whole.	”
— Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, iii. 11
Somehow disposed in relation to something (πρός τί πως ἔχον)
Characteristics related to other phenomena, such as the position of an object within time and space relative to other objects
Stoics outlined what we have control over categories of our own action, thoughts and reaction. The opening paragraph of The Enchiridion states the categories as; "Things in our control are opinion, pursuit, desire, aversion, and, in a word, whatever are our own actions. Things not in our control are body, property, reputation, command, and, in a word, whatever are not our own actions.". These suggest a space that is within our own control.

The Stoics propounded that knowledge can be attained through the use of reason. Truth can be distinguished from fallacy—even if, in practice, only an approximation can be made. According to the Stoics, the senses constantly receive sensations: pulsations that pass from objects through the senses to the mind, where they leave an impression in the imagination (phantasiai) (an impression arising from the mind was called a phantasma).[18]

The mind has the ability to judge (συγκατάθεσις, synkatathesis)—approve or reject—an impression, enabling it to distinguish a true representation of reality from one that is false. Some impressions can be assented to immediately, but others can only achieve varying degrees of hesitant approval, which can be labeled belief or opinion (doxa). It is only through reason that we gain clear comprehension and conviction (katalepsis). Certain and true knowledge (episteme), achievable by the Stoic sage, can be attained only by verifying the conviction with the expertise of one's peers and the collective judgment of humankind.

According to the Stoics, the Universe is a material, reasoning substance, known as God or Nature, which the Stoics divided into two classes, the active and the passive. The passive substance is matter, which "lies sluggish, a substance ready for any use, but sure to remain unemployed if no one sets it in motion".[19] The active substance, which can be called Fate or Universal Reason (Logos), is an intelligent aether or primordial fire, which acts on the passive matter:

The universe itself is God and the universal outpouring of its soul; it is this same world's guiding principle, operating in mind and reason, together with the common nature of things and the totality that embraces all existence; then the foreordained might and necessity of the future; then fire and the principle of aether; then those elements whose natural state is one of flux and transition, such as water, earth, and air; then the sun, the moon, the stars; and the universal existence in which all things are contained.

— Chrysippus, in Cicero, De Natura Deorum, i. 39
Everything is subject to the laws of Fate, for the Universe acts according to its own nature, and the nature of the passive matter it governs. The souls of humans and animals are emanations from this primordial Fire, and are, likewise, subject to Fate:

Constantly regard the universe as one living being, having one substance and one soul; and observe how all things have reference to one perception, the perception of this one living being; and how all things act with one movement; and how all things are the cooperating causes of all things that exist; observe too the continuous spinning of the thread and the structure of the web.

— Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, iv. 40
Individual souls are perishable by nature, and can be "transmuted and diffused, assuming a fiery nature by being received into the seminal reason ("logos spermatikos") of the Universe".[20] Since right Reason is the foundation of both humanity and the universe, it follows that the goal of life is to live according to Reason, that is, to live a life according to Nature.

Stoic theology is a fatalistic and naturalistic pantheism: God is never fully transcendent but always immanent, and identified with Nature. Abrahamic religions personalize God as a world-creating entity, but Stoicism equates God with the totality of the universe; according to Stoic cosmology, which is very similar to the Hindu conception of existence, there is no absolute start to time, as it is considered infinite and cyclic. Similarly, the space and Universe have neither start nor end, rather they are cyclical. The current Universe is a phase in the present cycle, preceded by an infinite number of Universes, doomed to be destroyed ("ekpyrōsis", conflagration) and re-created again,[21] and to be followed by another infinite number of Universes. Stoicism considers all existence as cyclic, the cosmos as eternally self-creating and self-destroying (see also Eternal return).

Stoicism, just like Indian religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism, does not posit a beginning or end to the Universe.[22] According to the Stoics, the logos was the active reason or anima mundi pervading and animating the entire Universe. It was conceived as material and is usually identified with God or Nature. The Stoics also referred to the seminal reason ("logos spermatikos"), or the law of generation in the Universe, which was the principle of the active reason working in inanimate matter. Humans, too, each possess a portion of the divine logos, which is the primordial Fire and reason that controls and sustains the Universe.[23]

The first philosophers to explicitly describe nominalist arguments were the Stoics, especially Chrysippus.

The ancient Stoics are often misunderstood because the terms they used pertained to different concepts in the past than they do today. The word "stoic" has come to mean "unemotional" or indifferent to pain because Stoic ethics taught freedom from "passion" by following "reason". The Stoics did not seek to extinguish emotions; rather, they sought to transform them by a resolute "askēsis" that enables a person to develop clear judgment and inner calm.[26] Logic, reflection, and concentration were the methods of such self-discipline, temperance is split into self-control, discipline and modesty.

Borrowing from the Cynics, the foundation of Stoic ethics is that good lies in the state of the soul itself; in wisdom and self-control. Stoic ethics stressed the rule: "Follow where reason leads."[citation needed] One must therefore strive to be free of the passions, bearing in mind that the ancient meaning of "passion" was "anguish" or "suffering",[27] that is, "passively" reacting to external events, which is somewhat different from the modern use of the word. A distinction was made between pathos (plural pathe) which is normally translated as passion, propathos or instinctive reaction (e.g., turning pale and trembling when confronted by physical danger) and eupathos, which is the mark of the Stoic sage (sophos). The eupatheia are feelings that result from correct judgment in the same way that passions result from incorrect judgment.

The idea was to be free of suffering through apatheia (Greek: ἀπάθεια; literally, "without passion") or peace of mind,[28] where peace of mind was understood in the ancient sense—being objective or having "clear judgment" and the maintenance of equanimity in the face of life's highs and lows.

For the Stoics, reason meant not only using logic, but also understanding the processes of nature—the logos or universal reason, inherent in all things. Living according to reason and virtue, they held, is to live in harmony with the divine order of the universe, in recognition of the common reason and essential value of all people.

The four cardinal virtues (aretai) of Stoic philosophy is a classification derived from the teachings of Plato (Republic IV. 426–435):

Wisdom (σοφία "sophia")
Courage (ανδρεία "andreia")
Justice (δικαιοσύνη "dikaiosyne")
Temperance (σωφροσύνη "sophrosyne")
Following Socrates, the Stoics held that unhappiness and evil are the results of human ignorance of the reason in nature. If someone is unkind, it is because they are unaware of their own universal reason, which leads to the conclusion of unkindness. The solution to evil and unhappiness then is the practice of Stoic philosophy: to examine one's own judgments and behavior and determine where they diverge from the universal reason of nature.

The Stoics accepted that suicide was permissible for the wise person in circumstances that might prevent them from living a virtuous life.[29] Plutarch held that accepting life under tyranny would have compromised Cato's self-consistency (constantia) as a Stoic and impaired his freedom to make the honorable moral choices.[30] Suicide could be justified if one fell victim to severe pain or disease,[29] but otherwise suicide would usually be seen as a rejection of one's social duty.


Whether you're having sex for the first time…

…or just want to fuck a girl real good…

I've collected the best sex tips all in one place both from my experience teaching guys and asking around for other people for their best tips.

After you're done with this guide you'll know how to have sex properly!

Actually whether you're a man or woman — it will help for both sides, but this one is more specifically for men.. ;)


#1 — Learn To Arouse Her Biggest Erogenous Zone — Brain
Disclosure: Some of the links below are affiliate links, meaning, at no additional cost to you, I will earn a commission if you click through and make a purchase.
Okay, I didn't realize this one for years.

I noticed that sometimes girls would respond well and jump on me. Sometimes they would just reject me and tell how inappropriate I'm touching them.

I was confused, mind-fucked.

But then I read some books and realized that man and woman is so much different. Arousal for men happens just from seeing naked body — pussy, breasts, ass..

For women, it happens in mind first.

Did you know that porn is 99% for men? But women prefer to read erotica?

Hint. Hint.

So how does it help you?

Duh. You need to invest in your seduction skills.

Plan it out ahead. If you wanna have sex in the evening, make sure you send her some dirty texts or get her out on a date and tease her.

Give the sexy looks, play with her like with a cat…

Cat loves to play with a toy he cannot catch. Sorry women who are reading, for the example.

Woman are the same, they want the play, the uncertainty, the tease.

Guys just wanna go straight for the price.

Nah! Doesn't work that way.

Just realizing that you must put time into this stuff will change your game.

Alex talks about it more on this video, his Sexual Psychic technique is especially good.


#2 — Learn Her Anatomy & Understand That Man and Woman's Arousal And Climax Happens Differently
I hinted this in #1 point.

But arousal is just one thing. We have different anatomies.

Spend time learning some good techniques on how to eat, lick, suck pussy.

How to finger her. Where the sexy bits are in her pussy..

Don't just pounce on her clit or G-spot.
Explore the whole area around.
It's all one big erogenous zone — her inner thighs, vagina lips…all the area around… the skin… just play with it all…!


Have fun while teasing her and ignoring her clit. It's the red rectangle you should avoid at first.

Do this and you'll drive her crazy!

If she's begging you to fuck her at some point — that's when you know you've properly aroused her!


#3 — Take Your Time With Foreplay: Kissing & Ignoring Her Pussy and Breasts
Women have tons of erogenous zones in the body.

Explore them all. Ask her around her most sensitive spots.

The foreplay can be tons of fun if you actually relax and enjoy yourself… Take your time.

As you slowly undress her, kiss her, touch her whole body with your nails, light touch, passionate touch… kissing, biting… All of that good stuff.

All the while ignoring her pussy and breasts… yep!

This sex tip alone will help you get better at fucking her later.

It's all about driving her around, playing around, teasing around.

And it's a ton of fun :)

Note: If you want to get a full-blown education on


#4 — Understand That Sex Is Not Like You See It In Porn
This is a biggie.

Even if we theoretically know that porn is acting, that's all that most of us have seen around sex. That's all the sex education we've got.

Is it any wonder that we are insecure about our penis sizes, women are insecure about their breasts and pussies?

On top of that — you wanna fuck her good. But hardcore fucking is just one of the shades of great sex.

There's a lot more to it.

There's slow sex, sensual sex — there is foreplay, eating her pussy, her sucking your cock.

And a lot of guys who search how to last longer and are insecure about that, don't realize that women actually don't enjoy having intercourse itself for more than 30 minutes.

Yes, 30 minutes of active fucking will make her pussy sore! Nooo…!

Ninja tip: But if you have problems with premature ejaculation, penis sleeves could help. (watch out for SheQu penis sleeve in that guide) — it will make your penis way less sensitive. (no need for crappy numbing creams).
Oh and then there is a myth that woman will orgasm just from intercourse.

Also no, countless studies have shown that only 20% of women come from intercourse!

Only 20%!

So… make sure if you fuck her, then also rub her clitoris at the same time. Or grind her in a way that your pubic bone rubs her pussy at the same time.

Whatever. Just don't forget about that clit.


#5 — Make Her Come First: Don't Even Start Intercourse Before You've Made Her Cum
If you wanna be a real champ, you will make her cum first.

Before even having sex with her. Just finger her, eat her pussy — make her orgasm!

This will do several things:

it will set you at ease and you will be able to relax more
She won't be upset if later you accidentally ejaculate too fast
It will get you horny as hell! Nothing is more pleasurable than making a girl cum while you are eating her out! It's addicting
And honestly… it's just good practice.

Nowadays man's orgasm is taken for granted, but many men forget that woman wants to have pleasure too..!

So invest in some education how to eat her out nicely.

Here's a video I made for you guys:


Ask her to show you how she gets herself off and pay attention.

Get a sex toy for her.

Vibrators are magic. Dildos are cool. G-spot dildos are epic.

These awesome tools will outsource some of the hard work and will add some kinky spiciness to your sex.

When you don't know what you're doing it takes ages to eat her out till orgasm, or make her squirt…

Yeah, your tongue and fingers do get tired after 15 mins of that stuff.

So use props and make your job easier.

Here is a toy I recommend, get PaloQueath Clit Sucker.

It's cheap and effective. My girl orgasmed in 15–30s with this, it was insane.

This toy will be especially handy if she has never orgasmed before, which simply means she needs more stimulation.

Get this and be her orgasm hero.


Find it on Amazon.

#6 — Don't Rely on Fucking Techniques: Experiment & Be Present
Yeah, invest in sex education.

Use it for few times, but then star improvising!

If you keep using techniques on her, it's gonna become mechanical and she'll feel it and it will murder her arousal.

She wants to be there with you, she doesn't want to feel like she's a fucking tool! If you want a tool just get a pocket pussy and jerk yourself off to death.

But when you're with her — pay attention to her. Be present, take her in.

Her breath, body sensations, trembles, eyes…. hair.

Drink it all in and listen to your subconscious and just do it. Just keep playing around, enjoying yourself and the partner and the whole sexual act.

This will make you both love sex more than ever!

Never ever you'll see something like that in porn. There it's all about grinding, screaming, squirting and humiliating the women.

Now, …this is some tantra shit… :) That's where tantra starts by the way — just doing nothing, feeling the magnetic arousal you have for the other person… and just noticing, being with it.

It's sexy as hell.

Rough fucking is also sexy. Just each has its own time and space.

Become improviser. Freestyler :)

And keep reading, learning about new things to try to feed your imagination even more.


#7 — Don't Ask Her What She Likes During Sex! Take Charge Instead.
Ouch.

Now you may wanna be a considerate, cool and caring guy, but if you ask her question while fucking her. You'll kill her arousal!

Yeah, you can ask simple questions like — Harder? Stronger? Is it good, baby?

Questions that she can simply answer Yes/No. Questions that don't make her think.

If you ask her what position she would like… or keep asking complicated questions on how to eat her pussy better…

Man… Just don't do it.

I rest my case.

You can always talk how it was after sex or when you're just cuddling or talking… Just don't do it during sex.

Most women will tell you if they want something. But if they don't tell you anything — just take the charge and be the fucking man!

Decide when it's time to change positions. Decide when you wanna eat her pussy out. Decide.

All the while paying attention to her. If you do that, you'll naturally feel what she likes, what she wants and will do it without her asking.

She'll be amazed and will love it.

Just keep practicing the presence and you'll discover the superpowers you'll start magically possessing.


#8 — Don't Focus on Your Own Sensations — Focus On Her Instead & Last Longer
When you focus on yourself, chances are you're disconnected and you ejaculate way too soon.

The trick here is to focus on her. Don't overstimulate yourself.

If you need more stimulation — sure, fuck her harder, look at her boobs, slap her ass… Get into a position where you have a nice, sexy look at her pussy.

But most of the time, you'll need to work on your temper to be able to last longer.

That's why it really helps to have constant breathing… and focus your attention on non-sexual parts of her body…

Focus in on her hair, eyes…belly, her breath… Whatever that makes you feel more connected with her.

She'll love it. And you'll last longer.

Simple enough, huh?


#9 — Show Her You're Enjoying It — Make Noises, Compliment Her
If you're thinking you're insecure — women are insecure too!

We each have our worries and if you wanna get her to enjoy sex with you, it's worthwhile to help her relax…and feel good about herself.

You do that, and she'll help you fix your insecurities too…

If you're like most men then you're a silent ninja during sex. Meaning you don't make noises, because you're a fucking man right?

Yet, you love her moaning and screaming, no?

Well, if you're just silently grinding her, how do you think she feels?

She might feel relaxed, but most likely she's wondering…

Is he enjoying it? Not sure… maybe I'm not sexy to him… My breasts are too small, I'm too fat, I have bony butt…

Set her at ease by showing and telling her how much you love having sex with her!

Compliment her body parts!

Say: how sexy her pussy looks to you! How much you love her breasts.

How her pussy makes you hard and horny.

Yeah, and don't be ashamed of making noises! Grunt, roar, groan — she'll love it and she will become more relaxed and louder…!

If you want her scream, start making some wild, primal noises yourself!


#10 — Spend Time Building Sexual Connection After Sex
Now, you nailed it all…

You had a nice fuck, both had a good time in bed… But after you ejaculated you just wanna sleep, clean up and move on with your life.

Right? Yeah. All men are like that.

But women miss the aftercare! Their favorite moments happen after sex.

The cuddling, the relaxation — it all builds your connection like nothing else.

If you just spend 10–15 minutes with her presently laying and loving her…

She'll fall in love with you fast… or she'll fall in love with you more and more…

You don't need to really do anything else — just lay there. Be with her…

That's what good fuckers do…

Bonus: Sex Tips From Other Men & Women
Now I gathered tons of advice and sex tips from other couples, men, women who are ahead of the game.

Read their stories and you might learn something!


#1 — What is the best sex tip you have ever gotten? What is the best tip you have?
This is a list of many tips from different men and women I surveyed.

“Start out like a butterfly landing on a flower, end like a bulldog eating a bowl of oatmeal”
“Slow down, stop focusing on orgasms, and focus on connection and shared pleasure.”
“COMMUNICATE. Say what you want, what you like, what feels good, what your partner can do better. Say what does not feel good, ask how you can be better. No one can read minds, you have to say this stuff out loud, in an actual conversation to a real person. Well, ok, email or text also works, but you gotta talk about it.”
The best advice I ever received was to make eye contact. The best advice I can give, be enthusiastic. Make your partner feel like they are the hottest thing on the planet.
Be comfortable with your sexuality and just enjoy yourself. Clear your mind and be in the present. I think its good to be always pushing the boundaries of your comfort zone.
Move your hips and forget about your dick for a few minutes, meaning ignore the in and out and focus in the grind.
Listen, communicate, and grab that ass like you own it
When you first penetrate a girl try just having sex with her with your cock head for a minute or two. Just the tip to build up suspense and then give her a good long stroke
Lube it up
Relax, don’t stress about what you look like and enjoy the feelings/sensations.
Never stop learning. Forever be a student.
Take shower

#2 — How To Eat Out Pussy Real Good
Yeah… if you wanna be good in bed you MUST know how to eat pussy (or give a blowjob as a woman)

“I consider myself pretty good at pussy eating out. After my very first girlfriend has received nothing but compliments.

Go with her flow (love it when she moves her hips grabs my hand or even give instructions, a silent sighing woman means I'm doing okay but i can do it much better.

I basically facefuck the pussy as you would deep throat a cock ease up on the clit make it exciting and unpredictable.

Once she gets to moaning often I increase the speed until I feel her legs shaking or she rests there then turn down the volume and finish with some kisses very slow and soft licking.

Basically, start out slow, tease — gradually increase speed jam your mouth into it.

Don't neglect the lips (your own) a lot of guys just lick it like an ice-cream cone or a dog slobbering on it.

Imagine a girl just blowing you back and forth with head movements pressure tongue-play — they love getting head as much as we do and it's an art that needs lots of practice!

Different women respond to different techniques and you just have to find out how!

The last girl I got to orgasm in under 5 minutes by putting my head into it, combined with lips tongue like a hurricane.

It's easier to suck a cock than it is to eat out a pussy, but man it is amazing when you do a great job.

Take your time besides oral, sex is bad when it's forced — you feel pressured and commanding.

The best sex is a long lasting session with some breaks in between, humor is important too, dirty talk maybe even role play and talking about yourselves in between or how much you cherish her/him what you like about each other.

It's a puzzle that falls in itself when the chemistry is right. You often don't need to even speak once during it once you know each other very well / love is involved :)”

Source: Anonymous


#3— [Pro-Tip] The 90-second orgasm, sex doesn’t ever have to stop getting better. An old guys advice.
This is an amazing story…super insightful tips from an experienced man.

“Short background:

Dating @ 16 (each other's firsts in everything)
Married @18
Kids @ 19 & 20
My (Male 38) wife (39) didn’t have her first orgasm until she was 25. And it was with a vibrator. For the next 13 years, she would have 1 and be done and only with a vibrator.

One magical night last year, she had her first O with only my penis. And then she was able to have many (2–6).

Last night, she came in 90 seconds with just my penis, a couple of minutes later and we were both cumming together and done.

You wanna know the secret?

A deepening emotional connection where she started to feel truly safe, loved and adored.

I firmly believe the quickest path to a woman’s physical pleasure is via her psyche.

Learn/Love/Appreciate/Adore, don’t focus on the orgasm, focus on a more thorough and complete understanding of the inner workings of her mind and the rest will follow.

There is literally no other explanation.

The real “magical connection” is the incredibly deep emotional one.

My wife had a hard time letting go of her anxieties/fears and was at times crippled by her insecurities.

She was an amazing homemaker, mother and incredibly giving human being. I was career focused, arrogant, and immature (teen father). I was a great provider, father and generous.

However, I underestimated her and didn’t recognize her complexity (which she was good at hiding).

We were (and ARE) best friends and lovers, but the passion had waned. As our kids started to become adults and leave we had a crisis of identity (she was a stay-at-home mother since 19).

We had a deep emotional bond, but I don’t think there is an upper limit on how strong it can get.

She became more comfortable in her own skin and I became less arrogant. The rest sort of just fell into place. The real point of my post is that human beings are complex and ever-changing.

A relationship can improve in unimaginable ways even after 20+ years of growing up together. The sex and orgasms are just a byproduct of the real magic we have, but it's way too hard to put those into a catchy reddit subject.

Think of it this way, the thrill of NRE (new relationship energy) can be DWARFED by the intense emotional and mental connection that can ONLY come from 20+ years of shared life experiences and that intense emotional and mental connection CAN manifest itself in new and amazing sexual experiences.

That was the point of my post, but telling a story is all about diluting things to a common denominator to entertain the masses.

You wanted details, here they are. “

Source: iOwnHer


#4 — [Sexual advice] Guys, we gotta moan more
“Yes, we have to moan more.

Believe me or not but our moans are like aural switches for our lady which makes her squirm with intense pain and lust for you, and how I reached this conclusion is what I wanna share with you guys.

I am a CS major who basically deals with writing numerous codes and programs every single day, and people who code clearly can understand the tiredness and lethargy one feels after writing a long piece of code.

My gf, on the other hand, is a nursing major and practically deals with, you know, nursing (IM SORRY I DON’T KNOW WHAT YOU LEARN IN NURSING).

So here was I in my room, locked and writing my code, and in the living room was my gf who was watching TV and having some laughs.

Amidst her laughs and the TV noise, I decided to ‘bust my stress off’ because I really needed to and since there was a good amount of aural distraction from the living room, I said: “Why not mate”.

Now we guys have a natural tendency to not moan when making love with our girl since we tend to hold our orgasm for a long time.

Holding it in itself takes self-control and focus so irrespective of how good or awesome it feels, we don’t want to finish before making our girl finish on us with 100% satisfaction.

And also, us guys feel a lot conscious about the moaning noises we make so, therefore, moaning in front of your girl really does not happen until you release your love juice for her, and since I myself am a guy I also am a part of this group.

Since I was alone in the room and there was a good amount of noise to cover up my moans in my room, I decided to do the deed and begin my work. (Now some might ask why not ask your gf for any help.

Well, she herself was tired from the day working with patients and wanted some rest to loosen up, so I did not bother to disturb her in any way).

Now here I am, jerking my cock off and moaning with light tingles down me while obviously making sure she does not hear me moaning by listening for any changes in volume in the living room, but the closer I approached my release, the more my body started giving away its cues of moans and hip jerks and “I'm gonna cum for you love”.

The release felt really good after a long day of work, so after my deed, I decided to clean it all up, wash my hands and spend some time with my gf but this is where the story took a twist and things went in the other way.

As I opened the door, I saw my gf standing right in front of the door, staring at me as if she saw something really lewd.

Me, realizing that she heard me do myself sunk me into embarrassment below measurable depths, but to what I expected she pushed me back to the bed, undid her clothes and rubbed herself on my cock and I swear to god, she was wet beyond limits and told me that my moans were something she always wanted to hear and finally hearing them made her so horny that she just wanted to have me after that.

And in a few minutes, she had me so much that I had the best sex of my life.

I know this is a long post to convey something short, but many guys like me out there are missing out on something very important in their sexual relationship and it is a conveyance of your pleasure to your partner.

Don’t be afraid to moan guys because it is something your girl really wants from you for her sexual confidence and your pleasure.

Believe me, your moans are switches for her; use them right and she really will become hot stuff for you.

TL;DR I was tired, I jerked off. Gf heard me moan, she got horny as fuck and fucked me like shit.”

Source: clutchking_asiimov


#5 — Men: Do Your Kegels! (seriously)
“Back story: I’ve been dating this girl for 3 weeks.

I am 30 years old and she is 23. Today was the first time we’ve had sex together.

We are both Yogi’s and I do a lot of tantric breathing to help sustain myself.

Today was the first time I’ve had sex in 3 years since my other girlfriend cheated on me.

Every day during my workouts I work on my PC muscle doing Kegel exercises.

For those that don’t know what it is here is the entry from Wikipedia:

“The pubococcygeus muscle or PC muscle is a hammock-like muscle, found in both sexes, that stretches from the pubic bone to the coccyx (tail bone) forming the floor of the pelvic cavity and supporting the pelvic organs.”

I was squeezing my PC muscle while inside her multiple times and she never felt that sensation before literally no guy ever did that to her and it made her quiver.

So do your f****** Kegels, men!

Strengthening the PC muscle helps with many things, it even can delay ejaculation if it’s strong enough, but most of the time what it does is when you squeeze that muscle it makes your penis move in an upward motion if strong enough.

I cannot stress enough that strengthening the pelvic floor is such a great thing and I discovered that today.

I am super ecstatic at this moment that I was able to give a woman a sensation she never felt before.”

Source: SwampRaider

Bringing It All Together
So I hoped you enjoyed this article and will remember just to have lots of practice.

The more sex you have, the better you'll become :)

After a while, it will be like riding a bike ;)

If you want more, I've written 100 more guides to help you become better in the bed…and enjoy more orgasmic life.

Enjoy!

Organisms of many species are specialized into male and female varieties, each known as a sex.[1][2] Sexual reproduction involves the combining and mixing of genetic traits: specialized cells known as gametes combine to form offspring that inherit traits from each parent. The gametes produced by an organism define its sex: males produce small gametes (e.g. spermatozoa, or sperm, in animals; pollen in seed plants) while females produce large gametes (ova, or egg cells). Individual organisms which produce both male and female gametes are termed hermaphroditic.[2] Gametes can be identical in form and function (known as isogamy), but, in many cases, an asymmetry has evolved such that two different types of gametes (heterogametes) exist (known as anisogamy).

Physical differences are often associated with the different sexes of an organism; these sexual dimorphisms can reflect the different reproductive pressures the sexes experience. For instance, mate choice and sexual selection can accelerate the evolution of physical differences between the sexes.

Among humans and other mammals, males typically carry an X and a Y chromosome (XY), whereas females typically carry two X chromosomes (XX), which are a part of the XY sex-determination system. Humans may also be intersex. Other animals have different sex-determination systems, such as the ZW system in birds, the X0 system in insects, and various environmental systems, for example in crustaceans. Fungi may also have more complex allelic mating systems, with sexes not accurately described as male, female, or hermaphroditic.[3]


Contents
1	Overview
2	Evolution
3	Sexual reproduction
3.1	Animals
3.2	Plants
3.3	Fungi
4	Sex determination
4.1	Genetic
4.2	Nongenetic
5	Sexual dimorphism
6	See also
7	References
8	Further reading
9	External links
Overview

The male gamete (sperm) fertilizing the female gamete (ovum)
One of the basic properties of life is reproduction, the capacity to generate new individuals, and sex is an aspect of this process. Life has evolved from simple stages to more complex ones, and so have the reproduction mechanisms. Initially the reproduction was a replicating process that consists in producing new individuals that contain the same genetic information as the original or parent individual. This mode of reproduction is called asexual, and it is still used by many species, particularly unicellular, but it is also very common in multicellular organisms, including many of those with sexual reproduction.[4] In sexual reproduction, the genetic material of the offspring comes from two different individuals. As sexual reproduction developed by way of a long process of evolution, intermediates exist. Bacteria, for instance, reproduce asexually, but undergo a process by which a part of the genetic material of an individual donor is transferred to another recipient.[5]

Disregarding intermediates, the basic distinction between asexual and sexual reproduction is the way in which the genetic material is processed. Typically, prior to an asexual division, a cell duplicates its genetic information content, and then divides. This process of cell division is called mitosis. In sexual reproduction, there are special kinds of cells that divide without prior duplication of its genetic material, in a process named meiosis. The resulting cells are called gametes, and contain only half the genetic material of the parent cells. These gametes are the cells that are prepared for the sexual reproduction of the organism.[6] Sex comprises the arrangements that enable sexual reproduction, and has evolved alongside the reproduction system, starting with similar gametes (isogamy) and progressing to systems that have different gamete types, such as those involving a large female gamete (ovum) and a small male gamete (sperm).[7]

In complex organisms, the sex organs are the parts that are involved in the production and exchange of gametes in sexual reproduction. Many species, both plants and animals, have sexual specialization, and their populations are divided into male and female individuals. Conversely, there are also species in which there is no sexual specialization, and the same individuals both contain masculine and feminine reproductive organs, and they are called hermaphrodites. This is very frequent in plants.[8]

Evolution
Main article: Evolution of sexual reproduction

Different forms of anisogamy:
A) anisogamy of motile cells, B) oogamy (egg cell and sperm cell), C) anisogamy of non-motile cells (egg cell and spermatia).

Different forms of isogamy:
A) isogamy of motile cells, B) isogamy of non-motile cells, C) conjugation.
Sexual reproduction first probably evolved about a billion years ago within ancestral single-celled eukaryotes.[9] The reason for the evolution of sex, and the reason(s) it has survived to the present, are still matters of debate. Some of the many plausible theories include: that sex creates variation among offspring, sex helps in the spread of advantageous traits, that sex helps in the removal of disadvantageous traits, and that sex facilitates repair of germ-line DNA.

Sexual reproduction is a process specific to eukaryotes, organisms whose cells contain a nucleus and mitochondria. In addition to animals, plants, and fungi, other eukaryotes (e.g. the malaria parasite) also engage in sexual reproduction. Some bacteria use conjugation to transfer genetic material between cells; while not the same as sexual reproduction, this also results in the mixture of genetic traits.

The defining characteristic of sexual reproduction in eukaryotes is the difference between the gametes and the binary nature of fertilization. Multiplicity of gamete types within a species would still be considered a form of sexual reproduction. However, no third gamete type is known in multicellular plants or animals.[10][11][12]

While the evolution of sex dates to the prokaryote or early eukaryote stage,[13] the origin of chromosomal sex determination may have been fairly early in eukaryotes (see evolution of anisogamy). The ZW sex-determination system is shared by birds, some fish and some crustaceans. XY sex determination is used by most mammals,[14] but also some insects,[15] and plants (Silene latifolia).[16] The X0 sex-determination is found in most arachnids, insects such as silverfish (Apterygota), dragonflies (Paleoptera) and grasshoppers (Exopterygota), and some nematodes, crustaceans, and gastropods.[17][18]

No genes are shared between the avian ZW and mammal XY chromosomes,[19] and from a comparison between chicken and human, the Z chromosome appeared similar to the autosomal chromosome 9 in human, rather than X or Y, suggesting that the ZW and XY sex-determination systems do not share an origin, but that the sex chromosomes are derived from autosomal chromosomes of the common ancestor of birds and mammals. A paper from 2004 compared the chicken Z chromosome with platypus X chromosomes and suggested that the two systems are related.[20]

Sexual reproduction
Main article: Sexual reproduction
Further information: Isogamy and Anisogamy

The life cycle of sexually reproducing organisms cycles through haploid and diploid stages
Sexual reproduction in eukaryotes is a process whereby organisms form offspring that combine genetic traits from both parents. Chromosomes are passed on from one generation to the next in this process. Each cell in the offspring has half the chromosomes of the mother and half of the father.[21] Genetic traits are contained within the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) of chromosomes—by combining one of each type of chromosomes from each parent, an organism is formed containing a doubled set of chromosomes. This double-chromosome stage is called "diploid", while the single-chromosome stage is "haploid". Diploid organisms can, in turn, form haploid cells (gametes) that randomly contain one of each of the chromosome pairs, via meiosis.[22] Meiosis also involves a stage of chromosomal crossover, in which regions of DNA are exchanged between matched types of chromosomes, to form a new pair of mixed chromosomes. Crossing over and fertilization (the recombining of single sets of chromosomes to make a new diploid) result in the new organism containing a different set of genetic traits from either parent.

In many organisms, the haploid stage has been reduced to just gametes specialized to recombine and form a new diploid organism; in others, such as cryptogamic plants the gametes are capable of undergoing cell division to produce multicellular haploid organisms. In either case, gametes may be externally similar, particularly in size (isogamy), or may have evolved an asymmetry such that the gametes are different in size and other aspects (anisogamy).[23] By convention, the larger gamete (called an ovum, or egg cell) is considered female, while the smaller gamete (called a spermatozoon, or sperm cell) is considered male. An individual that produces exclusively large gametes is female, and one that produces exclusively small gametes is male.[24] An individual that produces both types of gametes is a hermaphrodite; in some cases hermaphrodites are able to self-fertilize and produce offspring on their own, without a second organism.[25]

Animals
Main article: Sexual reproduction in animals

Hoverflies mating
Most sexually reproducing animals spend their lives as diploid, with the haploid stage reduced to single-cell gametes.[26] The gametes of animals have male and female forms—spermatozoa and egg cells. These gametes combine to form embryos which develop into a new organism.

The male gamete, a spermatozoon (produced in vertebrates within the testes), is a small cell containing a single long flagellum which propels it.[27] Spermatozoa are extremely reduced cells, lacking many cellular components that would be necessary for embryonic development. They are specialized for motility, seeking out an egg cell and fusing with it in a process called fertilization.

Female gametes are egg cells (produced in vertebrates within the ovaries), large immobile cells that contain the nutrients and cellular components necessary for a developing embryo.[28] Egg cells are often associated with other cells which support the development of the embryo, forming an egg. In mammals, the fertilized embryo instead develops within the female, receiving nutrition directly from its mother.

Animals are usually mobile and seek out a partner of the opposite sex for mating. Animals which live in the water can mate using external fertilization, where the eggs and sperm are released into and combine within the surrounding water.[29] Most animals that live outside of water, however, use internal fertilization, transferring sperm directly from to female to prevent the gametes from drying up.

In most birds, both excretion and reproduction is done through a single posterior opening, called the cloaca—male and female birds touch cloaca to transfer sperm, a process called "cloacal kissing".[30] In many other terrestrial animals, males use specialized sex organs to assist the transport of sperm—these male sex organs are called intromittent organs. In humans and other mammals this male organ is the penis, which enters the female reproductive tract (called the vagina) to achieve insemination—a process called sexual intercourse. The penis contains a tube through which semen (a fluid containing sperm) travels. In female mammals the vagina connects with the uterus, an organ which directly supports the development of a fertilized embryo within (a process called gestation).

Because of their motility, animal sexual behavior can involve coercive sex. Traumatic insemination, for example, is used by some insect species to inseminate females through a wound in the abdominal cavity—a process detrimental to the female's health.

Plants

Flowers are the sexual organs of flowering plants, usually containing both male and female parts.
Main article: Plant reproduction
Like animals, plants have developed specialized male and female gametes.[31] Within seed plants, male gametes are contained within hard coats, forming pollen. The female gametes of seed plants are contained within ovules; once fertilized by pollen these form seeds which, like eggs, contain the nutrients necessary for the development of the embryonic plant.

Pinus nigra cone.jpg	Pine cones, immature male.jpg
Female (left) and male (right) cones are the sex organs of pines and other conifers.
Many plants have flowers and these are the sexual organs of those plants. Flowers are usually hermaphroditic, producing both male and female gametes. The female parts, in the center of a flower, are the pistils, each unit consisting of a carpel, a style and a stigma. One or more of these reproductive units may be merged to form a single compound pistil. Within the carpels are ovules which develop into seeds after fertilization. The male parts of the flower are the stamens: these consist of long filaments arranged between the pistil and the petals that produce pollen in anthers at their tips. When a pollen grain lands upon the stigma on top of a carpel's style, it germinates to produce a pollen tube that grows down through the tissues of the style into the carpel, where it delivers male gamete nuclei to fertilize an ovule that eventually develops into a seed.

In pines and other conifers the sex organs are conifer cones and have male and female forms. The more familiar female cones are typically more durable, containing ovules within them. Male cones are smaller and produce pollen which is transported by wind to land in female cones. As with flowers, seeds form within the female cone after pollination.

Because plants are immobile, they depend upon passive methods for transporting pollen grains to other plants. Many plants, including conifers and grasses, produce lightweight pollen which is carried by wind to neighboring plants. Other plants have heavier, sticky pollen that is specialized for transportation by insects. The plants attract these insects or larger animals such as humming birds and bats with nectar-containing flowers. These animals transport the pollen as they move to other flowers, which also contain female reproductive organs, resulting in pollination.

Fungi
Main article: Mating in fungi

Mushrooms are produced as part of fungal sexual reproduction
Most fungi reproduce sexually, having both a haploid and diploid stage in their life cycles. These fungi are typically isogamous, lacking male and female specialization: haploid fungi grow into contact with each other and then fuse their cells. In some of these cases, the fusion is asymmetric, and the cell which donates only a nucleus (and not accompanying cellular material) could arguably be considered "male".[32] Fungi may also have more complex allelic mating systems, with other sexes not accurately described as male, female, or hermaphroditic.[3]

Some fungi, including baker's yeast, have mating types that create a duality similar to male and female roles. Yeast with the same mating type will not fuse with each other to form diploid cells, only with yeast carrying the other mating type.[33]

Many species of higher fungi produce mushrooms as part of their sexual reproduction. Within the mushroom diploid cells are formed, later dividing into haploid spores. The height of the mushroom aids the dispersal of these sexually produced offspring.[citation needed]

Sex determination
Main article: Sex-determination system

Sex helps the spread of advantageous traits through recombination. The diagrams compare evolution of allele frequency in a sexual population (top) and an asexual population (bottom). The vertical axis shows frequency and the horizontal axis shows time. The alleles a/A and b/B occur at random. The advantageous alleles A and B, arising independently, can be rapidly combined by sexual reproduction into the most advantageous combination AB. Asexual reproduction takes longer to achieve this combination, because it can only produce AB if A arises in an individual which already has B, or vice versa.
The most basic sexual system is one in which all organisms are hermaphrodites, producing both male and female gametes—[citation needed] this is true of some animals (e.g. snails) and the majority of flowering plants.[34] In many cases, however, specialization of sex has evolved such that some organisms produce only male or only female gametes. The biological cause for an organism developing into one sex or the other is called sex determination.

In the majority of species with sex specialization, organisms are either male (producing only male gametes) or female (producing only female gametes). Exceptions are common—for example, the roundworm C. elegans has an hermaphrodite and a male sex (a system called androdioecy).

Sometimes an organism's development is intermediate between male and female, a condition called intersex. Sometimes intersex individuals are called "hermaphrodite"; but, unlike biological hermaphrodites, intersex individuals are unusual cases and are not typically fertile in both male and female aspects.

Genetic

Like humans and other mammals, the common fruit fly has an XY sex-determination system.
In genetic sex-determination systems, an organism's sex is determined by the genome it inherits. Genetic sex-determination usually depends on asymmetrically inherited sex chromosomes which carry genetic features that influence development; sex may be determined either by the presence of a sex chromosome or by how many the organism has. Genetic sex-determination, because it is determined by chromosome assortment, usually results in a 1:1 ratio of male and female offspring.

Humans and other mammals have an XY sex-determination system: the Y chromosome carries factors responsible for triggering male development. The "default sex," in the absence of a Y chromosome, is female-like. Thus, XX mammals are female and XY are male. In humans, biological sex is determined by five factors present at birth: the presence or absence of a Y chromosome (which alone determines the individual's genetic sex), the type of gonads, the sex hormones, the internal reproductive anatomy (such as the uterus in females), and the external genitalia.[35]

XY sex determination is found in other organisms, including the common fruit fly and some plants.[34] In some cases, including in the fruit fly, it is the number of X chromosomes that determines sex rather than the presence of a Y chromosome (see below).

In birds, which have a ZW sex-determination system, the opposite is true: the W chromosome carries factors responsible for female development, and default development is male.[36] In this case ZZ individuals are male and ZW are female. The majority of butterflies and moths also have a ZW sex-determination system. In both XY and ZW sex determination systems, the sex chromosome carrying the critical factors is often significantly smaller, carrying little more than the genes necessary for triggering the development of a given sex.[37]

Many insects use a sex determination system based on the number of sex chromosomes. This is called X0 sex-determination—the 0 indicates the absence of the sex chromosome. All other chromosomes in these organisms are diploid, but organisms may inherit one or two X chromosomes. In field crickets, for example, insects with a single X chromosome develop as male, while those with two develop as female.[38] In the nematode C. elegans most worms are self-fertilizing XX hermaphrodites, but occasionally abnormalities in chromosome inheritance regularly give rise to individuals with only one X chromosome—these X0 individuals are fertile males (and half their offspring are male).[39]

Other insects, including honey bees and ants, use a haplodiploid sex-determination system.[40] In this case, diploid individuals are generally female, and haploid individuals (which develop from unfertilized eggs) are male. This sex-determination system results in highly biased sex ratios, as the sex of offspring is determined by fertilization rather than the assortment of chromosomes during meiosis.

Nongenetic

Clownfishes are initially male; the largest fish in a group becomes female
Main article: Environmental sex determination
For many species, sex is not determined by inherited traits, but instead by environmental factors experienced during development or later in life. Many reptiles have temperature-dependent sex determination: the temperature embryos experience during their development determines the sex of the organism. In some turtles, for example, males are produced at lower incubation temperatures than females; this difference in critical temperatures can be as little as 1–2 °C.

Many fish change sex over the course of their lifespan, a phenomenon called sequential hermaphroditism. In clownfish, smaller fish are male, and the dominant and largest fish in a group becomes female. In many wrasses the opposite is true—most fish are initially female and become male when they reach a certain size. Sequential hermaphrodites may produce both types of gametes over the course of their lifetime, but at any given point they are either female or male.

In some ferns the default sex is hermaphrodite, but ferns which grow in soil that has previously supported hermaphrodites are influenced by residual hormones to instead develop as male.[41]

Sexual dimorphism
Main article: Sexual dimorphism

Common pheasants are sexually dimorphic in both size and appearance.
Many animals and some plants have differences between the male and female sexes in size and appearance, a phenomenon called sexual dimorphism. Sex differences in humans include, generally, a larger size and more body hair in men; women have breasts, wider hips, and a higher body fat percentage. In other species, the differences may be more extreme, such as differences in coloration or bodyweight.

Sexual dimorphisms in animals are often associated with sexual selection—the competition between individuals of one sex to mate with the opposite sex.[42] Antlers in male deer, for example, are used in combat between males to win reproductive access to female deer. In many cases the male of a species is larger than the female. Mammal species with extreme sexual size dimorphism tend to have highly polygynous mating systems—presumably due to selection for success in competition with other males—such as the elephant seals. Other examples demonstrate that it is the preference of females that drive sexual dimorphism, such as in the case of the stalk-eyed fly.[43]

Other animals, including most insects and many fish, have larger females. This may be associated with the cost of producing egg cells, which requires more nutrition than producing sperm—larger females are able to produce more eggs.[44] For example, female southern black widow spiders are typically twice as long as the males.[45] Occasionally this dimorphism is extreme, with males reduced to living as parasites dependent on the female, such as in the anglerfish. Some plant species also exhibit dimorphism in which the females are significantly larger than the males, such as in the moss Dicranum[46] and the liverwort Sphaerocarpos.[47] There is some evidence that, in these genera, the dimorphism may be tied to a sex chromosome,[47][48] or to chemical signalling from females.[49]

In birds, males often have a more colourful appearance and may have features (like the long tail of male peacocks) that would seem to put the organism at a disadvantage (e.g. bright colors would seem to make a bird more visible to predators). One proposed explanation for this is the handicap principle.[50] This hypothesis says that, by demonstrating he can survive with such handicaps, the male is advertising his genetic fitness to females—traits that will benefit daughters as well, who will not be encumbered with such handicaps.

I’m an accidental killer – and thousands of Americans share this secret shame. How can you recover from the trauma of accidentally killing someone?

David Peters

Thu 29 Nov 2018 11.00 GMT Last modified on Fri 30 Nov 2018 19.24 GMT
Shares
559
 ‘There was another car smashed up on the side of the road. Then I saw a motorcycle, lying on its side.’
 ‘There was another car smashed up on the side of the road. Then I saw a motorcycle, lying on its side.’ Illustration: Benedicte Mueller
“There’s never a time, even when I’m laughing at a party, when I’m not thinking about it,” Pam Uhr says.

It was a hot summer day a few weeks before the end of her junior year of high school. Uhr and her friends had spent the afternoon at a swimming hole near their central Texas town. She was driving home on a country road, two friends as passengers, when her front tire slid. She overcorrected. The car spun. A car coming over a blind hill slammed into her passenger side, and everything went black.

She woke in a hospital. None of the doctors or nurses would say how the two boys in her car were doing. Her dad finally told her: they were dead.

Years later, after Uhr married and had three boys of her own, she found herself consumed by the thought that her three young sons would die as some kind of cosmic payback.

I nod my head as I listen to her story. It sounds a lot like the other stories I’ve heard over the years about accidental killings. First, immediately after the event, comes shock. Then the shame-filled memories of what happened. Then thoughts of impending karmic justice, which hang over the accidental killer’s head like the sword of Damocles – at every moment, even when you’re laughing at parties.

Can people move on after an accidental killing? I think about this question a lot. I’m an accidental killer too.


How dealing with past trauma may be the key to breaking addiction
 Read more
I was 19, just a few weeks out of Marine Corps boot camp, and had just begun my freshman year at a Bible college in West Virginia. It was Sunday evening, and my roommate and I were dressed for church according to college rules – jacket and tie. We were two young men steeped in the fundamentalist-evangelical world of our youth, heading for what many evangelicals consider the holiest of services, Sunday night.

I was driving my recently fixed-up 1973 VW Super Beetle. Around 5.30, as we rounded a curve in the road, the glare of the setting sun hit my eyes. I squinted and tried to shade my eyes with the car’s visor. I felt vulnerable in the passing lane, so I attempted to move into the right lane. As I moved right I saw a red Jeep already in that lane. I swerved back into my lane, but I swerved too far.

Advertisement

The driver’s side of my car slammed into a steel plate in the concrete median. The plate instantly crushed the front of our car, locking the tires in place and fracturing my kneecap, and we were thrown into the oncoming lane.

The next thing I remember is sitting in my stopped car, checking to see if my roommate in the passenger seat was alive. He seemed to be OK. I got out and felt sharp pain in my leg. All the traffic had stopped. There was another car smashed up on the side of the road. Then I saw a motorcycle, lying on its side.

A woman wearing a helmet was a few feet away. Her neck was bent at a strange angle and somehow I knew she was dead. I saw a man lying on the ground, and I went to him. He was on his stomach, and I could see blood flowing from between his legs on to the asphalt.

He looked up and said, “Fuck you, man.” I said I was sorry. I probably said it a thousand times in those few moments when our eyes met. I took off my red necktie and attempted to stop his bleeding.

Later, at the hospital, nurses got the windshield glass out of my hand and put my knee in a stabilizer. They said it would hurt for a while. It did hurt, and I wanted it to hurt. I wanted to feel something other than the feeling that I should be dead instead of that woman.


Matt Haig: 'I wanted to end it all, but surviving and thriving is the lesson I pass on'
 Read more
I went back to the dormitory that night. My roommate was there, shaken but not badly injured. I slept, and the next morning the dean of men came to see me. I was still lying in bed. He pulled a chair up and opened his giant King James Bible. He read a passage from the Hebrew Bible about the mysterious Cities of Refuge, ancient safe havens for people who had accidentally killed someone. The perpetrator would flee the avenging family of the deceased, escape to a City of Refuge, and live there until the Jewish high priest died. When the high priest died, accidental killers could go back to their homes, no longer at risk of revenge murder.

Advertisement

After reading this scripture, the dean said, “God made provision for what happened to you.” I don’t remember my response. I only remember being confused why he read that particular passage to me.

I didn’t go to any counseling and none was offered. I didn’t talk about what had happened with anyone. I felt guilty for surviving when a woman had been killed, and I knew I would carry that weight with me forever. I remember staring at a white wall and feeling like I was rushing toward it. If I took a nap, I would jerk awake from the sensation of hurtling uncontrollably toward the motorcycle.

I hobbled around on crutches for a couple of weeks, and by the next month I was driving again. The first time I drove I experienced symptoms of post-traumatic stress – reliving the helpless, locked-in feeling of the crash as I drove through a construction zone.

Several months later I was sued for $2.5m. I gave a deposition about what happened, and because I was a poor college student, because my father was a poor pastor with six kids, and for other reasons I do not know, the suit was dropped. It may have been because I hadn’t been drinking or speeding at the time of the accident.


Sign up for Lab Notes - the Guardian's weekly science update
 Read more
But I knew what I did was wrong – evil, on some level. I had killed a woman. I knew there was nothing I could do to undo it. There was nowhere I could go to get away from the feeling that I was no longer good. There certainly wasn’t a City of Refuge where I could live out my days until Billy Graham or the pope died.

With 40,000 automobile fatalities in the United States every year, in addition to innumerable fatal firearm accidents, mechanical accidents, and friendly fire and civilian killings in our nation’s wars, there are thousands and thousands of accidental killers out there. Some of them are famous, like Laura Bush, who writes movingly in her memoir of how she lost her faith in God the night she accidentally killed a fellow high school student in a car accident.

Most of us, however, stay silent, consumed by shame and worried that the blood-debt we have incurred will somehow come due.

Not only am I an accidental killer, I’m also a veteran. I served as a chaplain in Iraq. After coming home, I learned about the emerging concept of “moral injury”. Moral injury refers to the guilt and remorse many veterans feel after participating in actions that break their moral code. If you get PTSD from being preyed on by someone trying to hurt you, you get moral injury from being a, sometimes accidental, predator.

People suffering from moral injury wonder if they can ever be part of normal human society. The upside-down moral universe of war serves up numerous opportunities to do things that make us question whether we are good any more. I’ve noticed that several of my combat friends are vegetarians or vegans now. They don’t want to kill anything any more. I find myself in this camp most of the time.

Advertisement
Although I did not fully grasp what my dean was saying the morning after my accidental killing, I have pondered the implications of his story for many years. Could there be wisdom in these ancient practices?


The secrets of resilience: what one woman’s extraordinary trauma – and survival – can teach us
 Read more
The psychologist Maryann Gray thinks so. Gray is an accidental killer, although she prefers the title CADI: “causing accidental death or injury”. I spoke with her on the phone and thanked her for what she has done for accidental killers. Her website has helped many CADIs share their stories. It is the only resource for accidental killers I could find.

The site is a virtual City of Refuge. Many visitors to the site tell their stories for the first time, and the site provides understanding, resources and the crucial sense that the accidental killer is not alone. Indeed, Gray has shown how accidental killers can find fulfillment in helping more recent CADIs navigate the first days, weeks and months after their accidental killing.

The ability to share one’s story with people who have been through a similar experience is itself healing – and rare. I remember sharing my story with a girlfriend many years ago, only for her to say, “That’s terrible. I don’t think I can think of you the same way again.” I learned then that I couldn’t tell this story to just anyone. I needed safety and understanding.

I believe accidental killers feel guilt, in spite of everyone telling us it wasn’t our fault, because of a deep-in-our-bones instinct that a life must pay for a life. Even if it was an accident, someone has to pay. Years after my own accident, I bought a motorcycle and rode it obsessively, reasoning that justice would be served if I crashed and died.

None of the accidental killers I’ve spoken with have ever told me there’s one clear path to healing. The path I’ve found for myself hasn’t been clear at all. It’s been shrouded in ancient practices of ritual reconciliation, not exactly an easy sell in our modern, evidence-based culture.

Ancient religions sought to restore harmony to the tribe or community after a death, which was always a major loss to the security and strength of a community. In the case of the ancient Jewish concept of the Cities of Refuge, accidental killers were offered reconciliation when the high priest died; it was as if his death paid the debt for every accidental killer in the land.

A few years ago at a veterans’ conference, I participated in a Native American ritual of cleansing after war. The ritual, which came from the Coushatta tribe in Louisiana, was dramatic and simple at the same time; the person leading the ceremony described how she was using an eagle feather to ritually cut off my skin so a new person could step out of the old skin and back into the community after war. There are similar Zuni Pueblo and Navajo healing rituals, and the US Administration for Native Americans encourages Native American veterans to consider these rituals a component of their healing journey after war.

My own religion, Christianity, is no exception in the importance it places on themes of blood debt. Christians regard Jesus Christ as having died for our sins, and liturgies and teachings about Christ’s atonement on the cross often emphasize a cleansing of sin, especially the kinds of sins and transgressions that are impossible to reconcile with a simple apology.

The numerous Christian denominations offer various approaches to effecting this reconciliation. Perhaps best known is the practice of confessing to a priest. But there are many other rituals: an altar call in a Baptist church, a prayer huddle with Pentecostal sisters and brothers praying in tongues – all can be places for people to experience release from the moral injury of an accidental killing.

I founded an organization, the Episcopal Veterans Fellowship, to educate members of my denomination about moral injury in veterans and provide community for veterans inside and outside the church. Every year we hold a conference about moral injury in veterans at a seminary in Austin, Texas. This past Veterans Day, we had 75 veterans and caregivers show up to learn about moral injury and how communities can help veterans heal. I dream of a day when there are similar conferences where accidental killers can experience the community healing the veterans at the conference experienced.

For me, there is never a time when I’m not thinking about the accident. There’s also never a time when I don’t remember kneeling in an empty church with a priest, his hand on my head, pronouncing these words: “Now there is rejoicing in heaven; for you were lost, and are found; you were dead, and are now alive in Christ Jesus our Lord. Go in peace. The Lord has put away all your sins.”

Spanish (/ˈspænɪʃ/ (About this soundlisten); About this soundespañol (help·info)), known in the Middle Ages as Castilian[3] (/kæˈstɪliən/ (About this soundlisten), About this soundcastellano (help·info)), is a Romance language that originated in the Castile region of Spain and today has hundreds of millions of native speakers in the Americas and Spain. It is a global language and the world's second-most spoken native language, after Mandarin Chinese.[4][5][6][7][8]

Spanish is a part of the Ibero-Romance group of languages, which evolved from several dialects of Vulgar Latin in Iberia after the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century. The oldest Latin texts with traces of Spanish come from mid-northern Iberia in the 9th century,[9] and the first systematic written use of the language happened in Toledo, then capital of the Kingdom of Castile, in the 13th century. Beginning in 1492, the Spanish language was taken to the viceroyalties of the Spanish Empire, most notably to the Americas, as well as territories in Africa, Oceania and the Philippines.[10]

Around 75% of modern Spanish vocabulary is derived from Latin and, through Latin, Ancient Greek.[11][12] Spanish vocabulary has been in contact with Arabic from an early date, having developed during the Al-Andalus era in the Iberian Peninsula.[13][14][15][16] With around 8% of its vocabulary being Arabic in origin, this language is the second most important influence after Latin.[13][17][18] It has also been influenced by Basque, Iberian, Celtiberian, Visigothic, and by neighboring Ibero-Romance languages.[19][13] Additionally, it has absorbed vocabulary from other languages, particularly the Romance languages—French, Italian, Portuguese, Galician, Catalan, Occitan, and Sardinian—as well as from Quechua, Nahuatl, and other indigenous languages of the Americas.[20]

Spanish is one of the six official languages of the United Nations. It is also used as an official language by the European Union, the Organization of American States, the Union of South American Nations, the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, the African Union and many other international organizations.[21]

Despite its large number of speakers, the Spanish language does not feature prominently in scientific writing, with the exception of the humanities.[22]


Contents
1	Estimated number of speakers
2	Names of the language
3	History
4	Grammar
5	Phonology
5.1	Segmental phonology
5.2	Prosody
6	Geographical distribution
6.1	Europe
6.2	Americas
6.3	Africa
6.4	Asia-Pacific
7	Spanish speakers by country
8	Dialectal variation
8.1	Phonology
8.2	Morphology
8.3	Vocabulary
9	Relation to other languages
9.1	Judaeo-Spanish
10	Writing system
11	Organizations
11.1	Royal Spanish Academy
11.2	Association of Spanish Language Academies
11.3	Cervantes Institute
11.4	Official use by international organizations
12	See also
13	References
13.1	Bibliography
14	Further reading
15	External links
Estimated number of speakers
It is estimated that more than 437 million people speak Spanish as a native language, which qualifies it as second on the lists of languages by number of native speakers.[23] Instituto Cervantes claims that there are an estimated 477 million Spanish speakers with native competence and 572 million Spanish speakers as a first or second language—including speakers with limited competence—and more than 21 million students of Spanish as a foreign language.[24]

Spanish is the official or national language in Spain, Equatorial Guinea, and 19 countries in the Americas. Speakers in the Americas total some 418 million. It is also an optional language in the Philippines as it was a Spanish colony from 1569 to 1899. In the European Union, Spanish is the mother tongue of 8% of the population, with an additional 7% speaking it as a second language.[25] Spanish is the most popular second language learned in the United States.[26] In 2011 it was estimated by the American Community Survey that of the 55 million Hispanic United States residents who are five years of age and over, 38 million speak Spanish at home.[27]

According to a 2011 paper by U.S. Census Bureau Demographers Jennifer Ortman and Hyon B. Shin, the number of Spanish speakers is projected to rise through 2020 to anywhere between 39 million and 43 million, depending on the assumption one makes about immigration. Most of these Spanish speakers will be Hispanic, with Ortman and Shin projecting between 37.5 million and 41 million Hispanic Spanish speakers by 2020.

Names of the language
Main article: Names given to the Spanish language
Crystal Clear app kedit.svg
This section may need to be rewritten entirely to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards. You can help. The discussion page may contain suggestions. (December 2014)

Map indicating places where the language is called castellano or español
In Spain and in some other parts of the Spanish-speaking world, Spanish is called not only español (Spanish) but also castellano (Castilian), the language from the kingdom of Castile, contrasting it with other languages spoken in Spain such as Galician, Basque, Asturian, Catalan, Aragonese and Occitan.

The Spanish Constitution of 1978 uses the term castellano to define the official language of the whole Spanish State in contrast to las demás lenguas españolas (lit. "the other Spanish languages"). Article III reads as follows:

El castellano es la lengua española oficial del Estado. ... Las demás lenguas españolas serán también oficiales en las respectivas Comunidades Autónomas...
Castilian is the official Spanish language of the State. ... The other Spanish languages shall also be official in their respective Autonomous Communities...

The Spanish Royal Academy, on the other hand, currently uses the term español in its publications, but from 1713 to 1923 called the language castellano.

The Diccionario panhispánico de dudas (a language guide published by the Spanish Royal Academy) states that, although the Spanish Royal Academy prefers to use the term español in its publications when referring to the Spanish language, both terms—español and castellano—are regarded as synonymous and equally valid.[28]

Two etymologies for español have been suggested. The Spanish Royal Academy Dictionary derives the term from the Provençal word espaignol, and that in turn from the Medieval Latin word Hispaniolus, 'from—or pertaining to—Hispania'.[29] Other authorities[30][31] attribute it to a supposed mediaeval Latin *hispaniōne, with the same meaning.

History
Main article: History of the Spanish language

The Visigothic Cartularies of Valpuesta, written in a late form of Latin, were declared in 2010 by the Spanish Royal Academy as the record of the earliest words written in Castilian, predating those of the Glosas Emilianenses.[32]
The Spanish language evolved from Vulgar Latin, which was brought to the Iberian Peninsula by the Romans during the Second Punic War, beginning in 210 BC. Previously, several pre-Roman languages (also called Paleohispanic languages)—unrelated to Latin, and some of them unrelated even to Indo-European—were spoken in the Iberian Peninsula. These languages included Basque (still spoken today), Iberian, Celtiberian and Gallaecian.

The first documents to show traces of what is today regarded as the precursor of modern Spanish are from the 9th century. Throughout the Middle Ages and into the modern era, the most important influences on the Spanish lexicon came from neighboring Romance languages—Mozarabic (Andalusi Romance), Navarro-Aragonese, Leonese, Catalan, Portuguese, Galician, Occitan, and later, French and Italian. Spanish also borrowed a considerable number of words from Arabic, as well as a minor influence from the Germanic Gothic language through the migration of tribes and a period of Visigoth rule in Iberia. In addition, many more words were borrowed from Latin through the influence of written language and the liturgical language of the Church. The loanwords were taken from both Classical Latin and Renaissance Latin, the form of Latin in use at that time.

According to the theories of Ramón Menéndez Pidal, local sociolects of Vulgar Latin evolved into Spanish, in the north of Iberia, in an area centered in the city of Burgos, and this dialect was later brought to the city of Toledo, where the written standard of Spanish was first developed, in the 13th century.[33] In this formative stage, Spanish developed a strongly differing variant from its close cousin, Leonese, and, according to some authors, was distinguished by a heavy Basque influence (see Iberian Romance languages). This distinctive dialect spread to southern Spain with the advance of the Reconquista, and meanwhile gathered a sizable lexical influence from the Arabic of Al-Andalus, much of it indirectly, through the Romance Mozarabic dialects (some 4,000 Arabic-derived words, make up around 8% of the language today).[34] The written standard for this new language was developed in the cities of Toledo, in the 13th to 16th centuries, and Madrid, from the 1570s.[33]

The development of the Spanish sound system from that of Vulgar Latin exhibits most of the changes that are typical of Western Romance languages, including lenition of intervocalic consonants (thus Latin vīta > Spanish vida). The diphthongization of Latin stressed short e and o—which occurred in open syllables in French and Italian, but not at all in Catalan or Portuguese—is found in both open and closed syllables in Spanish, as shown in the following table:

Latin	Spanish	Ladino	Aragonese	Asturian	Galician	Portuguese	Catalan	Gascon / Occitan	French	Sardinian	Italian	Romanian	English
petra	piedra	pedra	pedra, pèira	pierre	perda	pietra	piatrǎ	'stone'
terra	tierra	terra	tèrra	terre	terra	țară	'land'
moritur	muere	muerre	morre	mor	morís	meurt	mòrit	muore	moare	'dies (v.)'
mortem	muerte	morte	mort	mòrt	mort	mòrti	morte	moarte	'death'

Chronological map showing linguistic evolution in southwest Europe
Spanish is marked by the palatalization of the Latin double consonants nn and ll (thus Latin annum > Spanish año, and Latin anellum > Spanish anillo).

The consonant written u or v in Latin and pronounced [w] in Classical Latin had probably "fortified" to a bilabial fricative /β/ in Vulgar Latin. In early Spanish (but not in Catalan or Portuguese) it merged with the consonant written b (a bilabial with plosive and fricative allophones). In modern Spanish, there is no difference between the pronunciation of orthographic b and v, with some exceptions in Caribbean Spanish.[citation needed]

Peculiar to Spanish (as well as to the neighboring Gascon dialect of Occitan, and attributed to a Basque substratum) was the mutation of Latin initial f into h- whenever it was followed by a vowel that did not diphthongize. The h-, still preserved in spelling, is now silent in most varieties of the language, although in some Andalusian and Caribbean dialects it is still aspirated in some words. Because of borrowings from Latin and from neighboring Romance languages, there are many f-/h-doublets in modern Spanish: Fernando and Hernando (both Spanish for "Ferdinand"), ferrero and herrero (both Spanish for "smith"), fierro and hierro (both Spanish for "iron"), and fondo and hondo (both Spanish for "deep", but fondo means "bottom" while hondo means "deep"); hacer (Spanish for "to make") is cognate to the root word of satisfacer (Spanish for "to satisfy"), and hecho ("made") is similarly cognate to the root word of satisfecho (Spanish for "satisfied").

Compare the examples in the following table:

Latin	Spanish	Ladino	Aragonese	Asturian	Galician	Portuguese	Catalan	Gascon / Occitan	French	Sardinian	Italian	Romanian	English
filium	hijo	fijo (or hijo)	fillo	fíu	fillo	filho	fill	filh, hilh	fils	fillu	figlio	fiu	'son'
facere	hacer	fazer	fer	facer	fazer	fer	far, faire, har (or hèr)	faire	fairi	fare	a face	'to do'
febrem	fiebre	febre	fèbre, frèbe, hrèbe (or 
herèbe)	fièvre	(calentura)	febbre	febră	'fever'
focum	fuego	fueu	fogo	foc	fuòc, fòc, huèc	feu	fogu	fuoco	foc	'fire'
Some consonant clusters of Latin also produced characteristically different results in these languages, as shown in the examples in the following table:

Latin	Spanish	Ladino	Aragonese	Asturian	Galician	Portuguese	Catalan	Gascon / Occitan	French	Sardinian	Italian	Romanian	English
clāvem	llave, clave	clave	clau	llave	chave	chave	clau	clé	crai	chiave	cheie	'key'
flamma	llama, flama	flama	chama	chama, flama	flama	flamme	framma	fiamma	flamă	'flame'
plēnum	lleno, pleno	pleno	plen	llenu	cheo	cheio, pleno	ple	plen	plein	prenu	pieno	plin	'plenty, full'
octō	ocho	güeito	ocho, oito	oito	oito (oito)	vuit, huit	uèch, uòch, uèit	huit	otu	otto	opt	'eight'
multum	mucho
muy	muncho
muy	muito
mui	munchu
mui	moito
moi	muito (muito)
mui (arch.)	molt	molt (arch.)	moult (arch.)	(meda)	molto	mult	'much,
very,
many'

Antonio de Nebrija, author of Gramática de la lengua castellana, the first grammar of modern European languages.[35]
In the 15th and 16th centuries, Spanish underwent a dramatic change in the pronunciation of its sibilant consonants, known in Spanish as the reajuste de las sibilantes, which resulted in the distinctive velar [x] pronunciation of the letter ⟨j⟩ and—in a large part of Spain—the characteristic interdental [θ] ("th-sound") for the letter ⟨z⟩ (and for ⟨c⟩ before ⟨e⟩ or ⟨i⟩). See History of Spanish (Modern development of the Old Spanish sibilants) for details.

The Gramática de la lengua castellana, written in Salamanca in 1492 by Elio Antonio de Nebrija, was the first grammar written for a modern European language.[36] According to a popular anecdote, when Nebrija presented it to Queen Isabella I, she asked him what was the use of such a work, and he answered that language is the instrument of empire.[37] In his introduction to the grammar, dated 18 August 1492, Nebrija wrote that "... language was always the companion of empire."[38]

From the sixteenth century onwards, the language was taken to the Spanish-discovered America and the Spanish East Indies via Spanish colonization of America. Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, author of Don Quixote, is such a well-known reference in the world that Spanish is often called la lengua de Cervantes ("the language of Cervantes").[39]

In the twentieth century, Spanish was introduced to Equatorial Guinea and the Western Sahara, and to areas of the United States that had not been part of the Spanish Empire, such as Spanish Harlem in New York City. For details on borrowed words and other external influences upon Spanish, see Influences on the Spanish language.

Grammar
Main article: Spanish grammar

Miguel de Cervantes, considered by many the greatest author of Spanish literature, and author of Don Quixote, widely considered the first modern European novel.
Most of the grammatical and typological features of Spanish are shared with the other Romance languages. Spanish is a fusional language. The noun and adjective systems exhibit two genders and two numbers, in addition articles and some pronouns and determiners have a neuter gender in singular. There are about fifty conjugated forms per verb, with 3 tenses: past, present, future; 2 aspects for past: perfective, imperfective; 4 moods: indicative, subjunctive, conditional, imperative; 3 persons: first, second, third; 2 numbers: singular, plural; 3 verboid forms: infinitive, gerund, and past participle. Verbs express T-V distinction by using different persons for formal and informal addresses. (For a detailed overview of verbs, see Spanish verbs and Spanish irregular verbs.)

Spanish syntax is considered right-branching, meaning that subordinate or modifying constituents tend to be placed after their head words. The language uses prepositions (rather than postpositions or inflection of nouns for case), and usually—though not always—places adjectives after nouns, as do most other Romance languages.

The language is classified as a subject–verb–object language; however, as in most Romance languages, constituent order is highly variable and governed mainly by topicalization and focus rather than by syntax. It is a "pro-drop", or "null-subject" language—that is, it allows the deletion of subject pronouns when they are pragmatically unnecessary. Spanish is described as a "verb-framed" language, meaning that the direction of motion is expressed in the verb while the mode of locomotion is expressed adverbially (e.g. subir corriendo or salir volando; the respective English equivalents of these examples—'to run up' and 'to fly out'—show that English is, by contrast, "satellite-framed", with mode of locomotion expressed in the verb and direction in an adverbial modifier).

Subject/verb inversion is not required in questions, and thus the recognition of declarative or interrogative may depend entirely on intonation.

Phonology
[]	This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.
MENU0:00
Spanish spoken in Spain
Main article: Spanish phonology
The Spanish phonemic system is originally descended from that of Vulgar Latin. Its development exhibits some traits in common with the neighboring dialects—especially Leonese and Aragonese—as well as other traits unique to Castilian. Castilian is unique among its neighbors in the aspiration and eventual loss of the Latin initial /f/ sound (e.g. Cast. harina vs. Leon. and Arag. farina).[40] The Latin initial consonant sequences pl-, cl-, and fl- in Spanish typically become ll- (originally pronounced [ʎ]), while in Aragonese they are preserved, and in Leonese they present a variety of outcomes, including [tʃ], [ʃ], and [ʎ]. Where Latin had -li- before a vowel (e.g. filius) or the ending -iculus, -icula (e.g. auricula), Old Spanish produced [ʒ], that in Modern Spanish became the velar fricative [x] (hijo, oreja, where neighboring languages have the palatal lateral [ʎ] (e.g. Portuguese filho, orelha; Catalan fill, orella).

Segmental phonology

Spanish vowel chart, from Ladefoged & Johnson (2010:227)
The Spanish phonemic inventory consists of five vowel phonemes (/a/, /e/, /i/, /o/, /u/) and 17 to 19 consonant phonemes (the exact number depending on the dialect[41]). The main allophonic variation among vowels is the reduction of the high vowels /i/ and /u/ to glides—[j] and [w] respectively—when unstressed and adjacent to another vowel. Some instances of the mid vowels /e/ and /o/, determined lexically, alternate with the diphthongs /je/ and /we/ respectively when stressed, in a process that is better described as morphophonemic rather than phonological, as it is not predictable from phonology alone.

The Spanish consonant system is characterized by (1) three nasal phonemes, and one or two (depending on the dialect) lateral phoneme(s), which in syllable-final position lose their contrast and are subject to assimilation to a following consonant; (2) three voiceless stops and the affricate /tʃ/; (3) three or four (depending on the dialect) voiceless fricatives; (4) a set of voiced obstruents—/b/, /d/, /ɡ/, and sometimes /ʝ/—which alternate between approximant and plosive allophones depending on the environment; and (5) a phonemic distinction between the "tapped" and "trilled" r-sounds (single ⟨r⟩ and double ⟨rr⟩ in orthography).

In the following table of consonant phonemes, /ʎ/ is marked with an asterisk (*) to indicate that it is preserved only in some dialects. In most dialects it has been merged with /ʝ/ in the merger called yeísmo. Similarly, /θ/ is also marked with an asterisk to indicate that most dialects do not distinguish it from /s/ (see seseo), although this is not a true merger but an outcome of different evolution of sibilants in Southern Spain.

The phoneme /ʃ/ is in parentheses () to indicate that it appears only in loanwords. Each of the voiced obstruent phonemes /b/, /d/, /ʝ/, and /ɡ/ appears to the right of a pair of voiceless phonemes, to indicate that, while the voiceless phonemes maintain a phonemic contrast between plosive (or affricate) and fricative, the voiced ones alternate allophonically (i.e. without phonemic contrast) between plosive and approximant pronunciations.

Consonant phonemes[42]
Labial	Dental	Alveolar	Palatal	Velar
Nasal		m			n		ɲ	
Stop	p	b	t	d		tʃ	ʝ	k	ɡ
Continuant	f	θ*	s		(ʃ)	x
Lateral				l		ʎ*	
Flap				ɾ		
Trill				r		
Prosody
Spanish is classified by its rhythm as a syllable-timed language: each syllable has approximately the same duration regardless of stress.[43][44]

Spanish intonation varies significantly according to dialect but generally conforms to a pattern of falling tone for declarative sentences and wh-questions (who, what, why, etc.) and rising tone for yes/no questions.[45][46] There are no syntactic markers to distinguish between questions and statements and thus, the recognition of declarative or interrogative depends entirely on intonation.

Stress most often occurs on any of the last three syllables of a word, with some rare exceptions at the fourth-last or earlier syllables. The tendencies of stress assignment are as follows:[47]

In words that end with a vowel, stress most often falls on the penultimate syllable.
In words that end with a consonant, stress most often falls on the last syllable, with the following exceptions: The grammatical endings -n (for third-person-plural of verbs) and -s (whether for plural of nouns and adjectives or for second-person-singular of verbs) do not change the location of stress. Thus, regular verbs ending with -n and the great majority of words ending with -s are stressed on the penult. Although a significant number of nouns and adjectives ending with -n are also stressed on the penult (joven, virgen, mitin), the great majority of nouns and adjectives ending with -n are stressed on their last syllable (capitán, almacén, jardín, corazón).
Preantepenultimate stress (stress on the fourth-to-last syllable) occurs rarely, only on verbs with clitic pronouns attached (guardándoselos 'saving them for him/her/them/you').
In addition to the many exceptions to these tendencies, there are numerous minimal pairs that contrast solely on stress such as sábana ('sheet') and sabana ('savannah'); límite ('boundary'), limite ('[that] he/she limits') and limité ('I limited'); líquido ('liquid'), liquido ('I sell off') and liquidó ('he/she sold off').

The orthographic system unambiguously reflects where the stress occurs: in the absence of an accent mark, the stress falls on the last syllable unless the last letter is ⟨n⟩, ⟨s⟩, or a vowel, in which cases the stress falls on the next-to-last (penultimate) syllable. Exceptions to those rules are indicated by an acute accent mark over the vowel of the stressed syllable. (See Spanish orthography.)

Geographical distribution
See also: Hispanophone

Geographical distribution of the Spanish language
  Official or co-official language
  1,000,000+
  100,000+
  20,000+
Active learning of Spanish.[48]
Spanish is the primary language of 20 countries worldwide. It is estimated that the combined total number of Spanish speakers is between 470 and 500 million, making it the second most widely spoken language in terms of native speakers.[49][50]

Spanish is the third most spoken language by total number of speakers (after Mandarin and English). Internet usage statistics for 2007 also show Spanish as the third most commonly used language on the Internet, after English and Mandarin.[51]

Europe
Main article: Peninsular Spanish

Percentage of people who self reportedly know enough Spanish to hold a conversation, in the EU, 2005
  Native country
  More than 8.99%
  Between 4% and 8.99%
  Between 1% and 3.99%
  Less than 1%
In Europe, Spanish is an official language of Spain, the country after which it is named and from which it originated. It is widely spoken in Gibraltar, and also commonly spoken in Andorra, although Catalan is the official language there.[52]

Spanish is also spoken by small communities in other European countries, such as the United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Germany.[53] Spanish is an official language of the European Union. In Switzerland, which had a massive influx of Spanish migrants in the 20th century, Spanish is the native language of 2.2% of the population.[54]

Americas
Hispanic America
Main article: Spanish language in the Americas
Most Spanish speakers are in Hispanic America; of all countries with a majority of Spanish speakers, only Spain and Equatorial Guinea are outside the Americas. Nationally, Spanish is the official language—either de facto or de jure—of Argentina, Bolivia (co-official with Quechua, Aymara, Guarani, and 34 other languages), Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico (co-official with 63 indigenous languages), Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay (co-official with Guaraní),[55] Peru (co-official with Quechua, Aymara, and "the other indigenous languages"[56]), Puerto Rico (co-official with English),[57] Uruguay, and Venezuela. Spanish has no official recognition in the former British colony of Belize; however, per the 2000 census, it is spoken by 43% of the population.[58][59] Mainly, it is spoken by the descendants of Hispanics who have been in the region since the seventeenth century; however, English is the official language.[60]

Due to their proximity to Spanish-speaking countries, Trinidad and Tobago and Brazil have implemented Spanish language teaching into their education systems. The Trinidad government launched the Spanish as a First Foreign Language (SAFFL) initiative in March 2005.[61] In 2005, the National Congress of Brazil approved a bill, signed into law by the President, making it mandatory for schools to offer Spanish as an alternative foreign language course in both public and private secondary schools in Brazil.[62] In September 2016 this law was revoked by Michel Temer after impeachment of Dilma Rousseff.[63] In many border towns and villages along Paraguay and Uruguay, a mixed language known as Portuñol is spoken.[64]

United States
Main article: Spanish language in the United States
See also: New Mexican Spanish

Spanish spoken in the United States and Puerto Rico. Darker shades of green indicate higher percentages of Spanish speakers.
According to 2006 census data, 44.3 million people of the U.S. population were Hispanic or Hispanic American by origin;[65] 38.3 million people, 13 percent of the population over five years old speak Spanish at home.[66] The Spanish language has a long history of presence in the United States due to early Spanish and, later, Mexican administration over territories now forming the southwestern states, also Louisiana ruled by Spain from 1762 to 1802, as well as Florida, which was Spanish territory until 1821.

Spanish is by far the most common second language in the US, with over 50 million total speakers if non-native or second-language speakers are included.[67] While English is the de facto national language of the country, Spanish is often used in public services and notices at the federal and state levels. Spanish is also used in administration in the state of New Mexico.[68] The language also has a strong influence in major metropolitan areas such as those of Los Angeles, Miami, San Antonio, New York, San Francisco, Dallas, and Phoenix; as well as more recently, Chicago, Las Vegas, Boston, Denver, Houston, Indianapolis, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Salt Lake City, Atlanta, Nashville, Orlando, Tampa, Raleigh and Baltimore-Washington, D.C. due to 20th- and 21st-century immigration.

Africa
Main article: Equatoguinean Spanish

Donato Ndongo-Bidyogo, writer, poet, journalist and promoter of the Spanish language.

Bilingual signage of Museum of the Sahrawi People's Liberation Army in Western Sahara written in Spanish and Arabic.
In Africa, Spanish is official (along with Portuguese and French) in Equatorial Guinea, as well as an official language of the African Union. In Equatorial Guinea, Spanish is the predominant language when native and non-native speakers (around 500,000 people) are counted, while Fang is the most spoken language by number of native speakers.[69][70]

Spanish is also spoken in the integral territories of Spain in North Africa, which include the Spanish cities of Ceuta and Melilla, the Plazas de soberanía, and the Canary Islands archipelago (population 2,000,000), located some 100 km (62 mi) off the northwest coast of mainland Africa. In northern Morocco, a former Spanish protectorate that is also geographically close to Spain, approximately 20,000 people speak Spanish as a second language, while Arabic is the de jure official language. A small number of Moroccan Jews also speak the Sephardic Spanish dialect Haketia (related to the Ladino dialect spoken in Israel). Spanish is spoken by some small communities in Angola because of the Cuban influence from the Cold War and in South Sudan among South Sudanese natives that relocated to Cuba during the Sudanese wars and returned in time for their country's independence.[71]

In Western Sahara, formerly Spanish Sahara, Spanish was officially spoken during the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Today, Spanish in this disputed territory is maintained by populations of Sahrawi nomads numbering about 500,000 people, and is de facto official alongside Arabic in the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, although this entity receives limited international recognition.[72][73]

Asia-Pacific
See also: Spanish language in the Philippines


La Solidaridad newspaper and Juan Luna (a Filipino Ilustrado).
Spanish was an official language of the Philippines from the beginning of Spanish administration in 1565 to a constitutional change in 1973. During Spanish colonization (1565–1898), it was the language of government, trade and education, and spoken as a first language by Spaniards and educated Filipinos. In the mid-nineteenth century, the colonial government set up a free public education system with Spanish as the medium of instruction. This increased use of Spanish throughout the islands led to the formation of a class of Spanish-speaking intellectuals called the Ilustrados. By the time of Philippine independence in 1898, around 70% of the population had knowledge of Spanish, with 10% speaking it as their first and only language and about 60% of the population spoke it as their second or third language.[74]

Despite American administration after the defeat of Spain in the Spanish–American War in 1898, the usage of Spanish continued in Philippine literature and press during the early years of American administration. Gradually, however, the American government began increasingly promoting the use of English, and it characterized Spanish as a negative influence of the past. Eventually, by the 1920s, English became the primary language of administration and education.[75] But despite a significant decrease in influence and speakers, Spanish remained an official language of the Philippines when it became independent in 1946, alongside English and Filipino, a standardized version of Tagalog.


Early flag of the Filipino revolutionaries ("Long live the Philippine Republic!"). The first two constitutions were written in Spanish.
Spanish was removed from official status in 1973 under the administration of Ferdinand Marcos, but regained its status as an official language two months later under Presidential Decree No. 155, dated 15 March 1973.[76] It remained an official language until 1987, with the ratification of the present constitution, in which it was re-designated as a voluntary and optional auxiliary language.[77] In 2010, President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo encouraged the reintroduction of Spanish-language teaching in the Philippine education system.[78] But by 2012, the number of secondary schools at which the language was either a compulsory subject or an elective had become very limited.[79] Today, despite government promotions of Spanish, less than 0.5% of the population report being able to speak the language proficiently.[80] Aside from standard Spanish, a Spanish-based creole language—Chavacano—developed in the southern Philippines. The number of Chavacano-speakers was estimated at 1.2 million in 1996. However, it is not mutually intelligible with Spanish.[81] Speakers of the Zamboangueño variety of Chavacano were numbered about 360,000 in the 2000 census.[82] The local languages of the Philippines also retain some Spanish influence, with many words being derived from Mexican Spanish, owing to the administration of the islands by Spain through New Spain until 1821, and then directly from Madrid until 1898.[83][84]

Spanish loan words are present in the local languages of Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, Palau, Marshall Islands and Micronesia, all of which formerly comprised the Spanish East Indies.[85][86]

Cause nothing ever gonna make this world better
If we don’t start believin’,
That love really really really is the answer, . . . Spread the love
~ Kenny Chesney

It’s showing up regularly on my Facebook feed: “Spread the Love.” Yes, it’s a popular song by Kenny Chesney. But not all the posts are sharing the music. Others are sharing the sentiment: Spread the love.

Facebook taps into the emotional pipeline of our culture. There are certainly hateful, sad and angry posts put up by hateful, sad and angry people. But there are many more posts that share and plead for understanding, kindness and love of self and others. Good and evil. Right and wrong. It’s an age-old debate. It’s up to each of us to decide which side wins our heart and mind.

I’m for the love. Anything that helps build community, peace and goodwill is healthier for us as individuals and for our world as a whole. Whether as a song, slogan, bumper sticker or Facebook post, “spread the love” reminds us to stay on the side of positivity and hope.

Below are six reasons to spread the love:

It’s good for you psychologically.
Research shows that people who are positive in their approach to others and to life in general are less likely to be depressed or anxious. Why? Because people who have an optimistic and positive view of life are better able to manage stress. When faced with an inconvenience or crisis, those who are connected positively with others don’t sink into despair. They turn to their support system and focus on what they can do about it. They have a solid foundation of self-love that gives them a “can do” approach to the problems that life inevitably hands out to everyone. They know that love grows when it is shared. Studies have shown that people who spread the love by volunteering are less likely to be lonely or depressed.
It’s good for you physically.
Your mind and body are one integrated whole. When we are with people we love, the body releases hormones, such as oxytocin and dopamine, that generate feelings of trust, pleasure and closeness. When we expand those loving feelings to the greater world, we actually improve the prognosis if we should develop cancer or heart disease.
Research has shown that belief in the essential goodness in the world contributes to a healthy immune system. Further, the Mayo Clinic reports that people who live life from the heart live longer and are less vulnerable to diseases of the heart (cardiovascular problems). Other studies show that those who volunteer to help others have lower blood pressure. It seems that people who spread the love are more likely to take care of themselves and others by adopting healthier lifestyles.

It attracts others to you.
When you spread the love, the love comes back to you many times over through loving relationships. People feel good when they are with someone who is upbeat and energetic. They don’t feel as good when they are with a Debbie Downer who always sees the dark cloud around the silver lining.
In her poem, “Solitude,” 19th-century poet Ella Wheeler Wilcox penned the phrase: “Laugh, and the world laughs with you; weep, and you weep alone.” She didn’t mean that we will be abandoned when we are truly grieving. Her poem ponders how difficult it is to know what to do when another person is sad but how easy it is to be with those who are cheerful. Another less-quoted line from the same poem is “Be glad and your friends are many.”

It creates safety.
Love, whether the romantic variety or a general feeling of love and care for humankind, is manifested by attachment and caring. When people love, they want to help, encourage and even rescue those who are in their orbit. People who spread the love want to relieve the suffering of others however they can. They are the first responders, the helpful neighbors and the volunteers who weave the safety net in our communities. They are not interested in building walls. Instead, they build bridges.
It invites positive things to enter your life.
It’s quite remarkable. A positive attitude does tend to invite positive things. It’s not really magic. People notice what they care about at the time. If you buy a new red car, chances are you are going to notice all the other red cars on the road. Pregnant women start to notice how many other pregnant women are in the mall.
If we are mired in negativity, we will see things that confirm that point of view. When we are on the lookout for kindness and love, we are more likely to see evidence of both. When we are optimistic, we are more likely to spot promising opportunities and more likely to take reasonable risks.

It counteracts hate.
Hate is grounded in fear. When people don’t feel safe, they flee or fight or become immobilized. They develop the mindset that there isn’t enough of whatever they value to go around, so they hoard and defend and isolate themselves from others. They unite with others who are equally afraid so they are not regularly confronted with information that argues with their point of view.
People who spread the love feel confident in their ability to cope. As a result, they can reach past fear to love and understanding. Differences in opinion are interesting, not threatening. They turn outward instead of inward, looking for new resources, new information, and new and solvable ways to address a problem. It is these loving people who will solve the problems of those who are bent on hate.

The Dalai Lama sums it up well, saying, “Love and compassion are necessities, not luxuries. Without them humanity cannot survive.”

Spread the love.

There is nothing quite like love. It makes us feel happy and appreciated, and most of us would like a little more love in our lives. But how can you make the world a more loving place?

It only takes one small act to share feelings of love and kindness. Check out 15 little things that you can do every day to help spread love and joy.

1. Mentor someone
Do you have a skill that you can share with others? Volunteering as a mentor for someone gives them the chance to improve their skills, which could help their career or benefit them in other ways. From business to baking, there are lots of things people would like to learn about.

2. Send fun texts to your loved ones
Take a few minutes each day to send your friends a funny text or picture. It will put a smile on their face, and they may send it on to other people, spreading more love and laughter.

3. Do one little act of kindness every day
You could smile at a stranger, hold a door open for someone or help someone with heavy bags. It only takes a few seconds to do so, but the other person will appreciate your gesture – and it will probably put them in a much better mood!

4. Spread positive gossip
So many conversations are based around nasty, mean gossip. Try switching to a more positive angle and you will notice more love and happiness in your life – and you won’t upset anyone if they find out what you said!

Infuse your life with action. Don't wait for it to happen. Make it happen. Make your own future. Make your own hope. Make your own love. And whatever your beliefs, honor your creator, not by passively waiting for grace to come down from upon high, but by doing what you can to make grace happen... yourself, right now, right down here on Earth. 
Read more at: https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/bradley_whitford_410518

“Constant kindness can accomplish much. As the sun makes ice melt, kindness causes misunderstanding, mistrust, and hostility to evaporate.”
Albert Schweitzer

“A single act of kindness throws out roots in all directions, and the roots spring up and make new trees.”
Amelia Earhart

A very simple way to spread more happiness in your own little world is through kindness. It's often an easy and quick thing you can do as you move through your daily life.


But we sometimes forget about it. Or don’t remember how it can help us all.

Three things that I like to keep in mind and that help me to try to be a kinder person are these:

I get what I give. Yep, some people will be ungrateful, miserable and not reciprocating no matter what you may do. But most people will over time treat you as you treat them.
By being kinder to others I am more likely to be kinder to myself. It may sound a bit odd but my experience is that when I am kinder towards others then my self-esteem goes up.
It creates a happier place to live in. Being kinder simply makes my own little world a nicer and happier place to live in.
So how can you start spreading the kindness and happiness in your daily life?

Here are 15 simple ways to do it.

Pick one of them that resonates with you and start using it today.

1. Express your gratitude. 

Think about what you can be grateful for about someone in your life.

Maybe that he is a good listener, that he often is quick to help out or that he always adds great songs to a Spotify playlist. Or simply that he held up the door for you.

Then express that gratitude in a simple “thank you!” or in a sincere sentence or two.

2. Replace the judgments. 

No one likes to be judged. And the more you judge other people the more you tend to judge yourself.

So despite the temporary benefit of deriving pleasure from the judgments it is not a good or smart long-term habit.

When you feel the urge to judge ask yourself: what is one kind thing I can think or do in this situation instead?

3. Replace the unconstructive criticism. 

Try encouragement instead of excessive criticism. It helps people to both raise their self-esteem and to do a better job.

And it will make things more fun and more light-hearted in the long run.

4. Put yourself in the other person’s shoes. 

It is quite easy to resort to unkindness when you see things just from your perspective.

Two questions that help me to see and to better understand other viewpoints are:

How would I think and feel it if I were in his or her shoes?
What parts of this person can I see in myself?
5. Recall how people’s kindness made you feel.

Just sit down for a few minutes and try to recall one time or a few times when other people’s kindness really touched you and helped you out.

Then think about how you can do those very same things for someone in your life.

6. Express kindness for something you may often take for granted.

It is easy to remember and to feel motivated to express kindness when someone is having a rough time or have just finished an important project.

But also remember to express kindness for how someone continues to put so much love into the dinners you eat. Or for being on time every day and doing their job well and keeping deadlines.

7. Hide a surprising and kind note.

Leave a small note with a loving or encouraging sentence in your partner’s or child’s lunchbox, hat, tea-container or book that he or she is reading right now.

That minute of your time will put a smile on her face and joy and motivation in her heart.

8. Just be there.

Listen – without thinking about something else – when someone needs to vent.

Just be there fully with your attention.

Or have a conversation and help someone find his or her way out of fear and to a more constructive and grounded perspective.

9. Remember the small acts of kindness too.

Let someone into your lane while driving. Let someone skip ahead of you in a line if he's in a real hurry.

Hold up the door for someone or ask if they need help when you see them standing around with a map and a confused look.

10. Give someone an uplifting gift.

Someone in your life may have a bit of a tough time right now. Then send him or her an inspirational book or movie.

Or simply send an email with a link to something inspiring or funny that you have found like a blog, podcast or a comic.

11. Help someone out practically.

Give them a hand when moving or with making dinner or arrangements before a party.

If they need information, then help out by googling it or by asking knowledgeable people that you know.

12. Help the people in your life see how they make a difference in their lives.

When you talk to someone about his or her day or what has been going on lately then make sure to point out how he or she also has spread kindness and happiness.

People are often unaware of the positive things they do or they minimize them in their own minds.

So help them to see themselves in a more positive light and to improve their own self-esteem.

13. Remember the 3 reasons for kindness at the start of this article.

It will help you to be kinder even when you may not always feel much like it.

If you like, write those reasons down on a piece of paper and put that note where you can see it every day.

14. Pay it forward.

When someone does something kind for you – no matter how big or small – then try to pay that forward by being kind to someone else as soon as you can.

15. Be kinder towards yourself.

Then you will naturally treat other people with more kindness too. It is truly a win-win habit.

How To Spread Happiness

Happiness is the state of positive emotions or expression of joy. It is further described as emotions of love, joy, inner peace. Happiness is desired by everyone here in the entire globe; every human being wants to be happy. People struggle to earn their living, comforts and necessities to fulfil their goals to seek happiness. Everyone finds happiness but never think of spreading it to their surroundings.

Spreading happiness is an "art". You can find many people around you who can demoralize you or can make you unhappy, but there are only handful of people who can actually spread happiness and positivism.

The first thing that you all should keep in mind that,first you yourself need to be happier then only you can make others happy. Happiness can't come out from a pessimistic person. It always comes out from a healthy body and healthy mind.

It is said that- "The best way to multiply happiness is to share it."

When we share moments of joy and positivism we unknowingly indulge in this art of happiness. When we share our joyful moments with others it ultimately enhances our happiness. We always celebrate our joy and happiness with others whether it is big or small. Celebrating with others multiplies our happiness; it is the medium to spread happiness among others.

"Happiness doesn't result from what we get, but from what we give."

The art of giving means to truly give from the heart without any expectation of return. Joy of giving is one of the best means to spread happiness. Giving others and sharing makes someone's life better through which we bring smile on someone face which leads to happiness.

"Sometime your joy is the source of your smile, but sometimes your smile can be source of your joy."

A smile is one of the beautiful gift of almighty given to us sharing a smile is one of the best way to spread happiness to others. Smile is a natural expression of happiness which directly comes from heart. You may present someone a smile. Involve more and more people with you, make a laughter club.

Be jolly, create humor from small things, maintain a happy and light weighted and enthusiastic environment around you. The above tricks will help you to spread happiness in your surroundings and will never let you and your loved ones in stress.

There are many different ways you can boost your energy, but see your health practitioner first to make sure you don't have an underlying medical problem.

Energy explained 
Food, which gives us energy, is broken down by the digestive system. Some elements, such as water, are absorbed through the stomach. The rest are absorbed through the small intestine. 

The body's preferred energy source is glucose, from carbohydrates , but it can also use fatty acids (from fats) and amino acids (from proteins). Glucose is delivered to virtually every cell in the body by the bloodstream, and is then burned with oxygen to produce energy. Hormones control every step in this process; for example, the pancreas makes the hormone insulin, which helps to control blood sugar levels.

Dietary suggestions 
If you want more energy, look at your diet and make sure you're following these basic guidelines: 

Drink lots of water. A dehydrated body functions less efficiently.
Be careful with caffeine. 1 or 2 caffeinated drinks per day like coffee, tea or cola can boost your energy and mental alertness, but more than 6 caffeinated drinks per day may make you anxious, irritable, and negatively affect your performance. 
Eat breakfast. Food boosts your metabolism and gives your body energy to burn. The brain relies on glucose for fuel, so choose carbohydrate-rich breakfast foods such as cereals or whole grain bread.
Don't skip meals. Going without food for too long allows blood sugar levels to dip. Try to eat regularly to maintain your energy levels throughout the day.
Don't crash diet. Low calorie diets or diets that severely restrict carbohydrates don't contain enough energy for your body's needs. The typical crash diet also deprives the body of nutrients such as vitamins, minerals and trace elements.
Eat a healthy diet. Increase the amount of fruit, vegetables, whole grain foods, low fat dairy products and lean meats in your diet. Reduce the amount of high fat, high sugar and high salt foods.
Don't overeat. Large meals can drain your energy. Instead of eating 3 big meals per day, try eating 6 mini-meals to spread your calorie intake more evenly. This will result in more constant blood sugar and insulin levels. You'll also find it easier to lose excess body fat.
Eat iron rich foods. Women in particular are prone to iron-deficiency (anemia). Make sure your diet includes iron rich foods such as lean red meat.
Sleep suggestions: 
A common cause of fatigue is not enough sleep, or poor quality sleep. Suggestions include: 

Get enough sleep. Adults need about 8 hours per night.
Limit caffeine. Too much caffeine, especially in the evening, can cause insomnia. Limit caffeinated drinks to 5 or fewer per day, and avoid these types of drinks after dinner.
Learn how to relax. A common cause of insomnia is fretting while lying in bed. Experiment with different relaxation techniques until you find one or two that work for you; for example, you could think of a restful scene, focus on your breathing, or silently repeat a mantra or phrase.
Avoid sleeping pills. Sleeping pills don't work in the long term because they don't address the causes of insomnia.
Avoid reading or watching TV in bed.
Lifestyle suggestions:
Don't smoke. Cigarette smoke contains many harmful substances. There are many reasons why smokers typically have lower energy than non-smokers. For example, the body needs to combine glucose with oxygen to make energy, but carbon monoxide in cigarette smoke reduces the amount of oxygen available.
Limit the time you sit down. Reduce sedentary behaviours such as watching television and using computers.
Increase physical activity. Physical activity boosts energy levels, while a sedentary lifestyle is known to cause fatigue. Being active has many healthy effects on the body and mind. It reduces blood pressure, helps to maintain a healthy weight, and is an effective treatment for depression and anxiety. A good bout of exercise also helps you sleep better at night.
Seek advice. If you haven't exercised in a long time, are obese, are over age 40 or have a chronic medical condition, seek advice from your doctor or health practitioner regarding small steps you can take towards a more active lifestyle.
Seek treatment for substance abuse if you need it. Excessive alcohol consumption or recreational drug use contributes to fatigue.   It's also potentially dangerous.
Workplace issues. Demanding jobs, conflicts at work and burnout are common causes of fatigue. Take steps to address your work problems. A good place to start is to talk with your human resources officer.
Psychological issues 
Studies suggest that between 50 and 80% of fatigue cases are mainly due to psychological factors. Suggestions include:  

Assess your lifestyle. Are you putting yourself under unnecessary stress? Are there ongoing problems in your life that may be causing prolonged anxiety or depression? It may help to seek professional counselling to work out family, career or personal issues.
Relaxation training. Constant anxiety drains the body of energy and can lead to burnout. Relaxation techniques, such as meditation and yoga, help to 'switch off' adrenaline and allow your body and mind to recover.
Learn to do nothing. A hectic lifestyle is exhausting. Try to carve out a few more hours in your week to simply relax and hang out. If you can't find a few more hours, it may be time to rethink your priorities and commitments.
Have more fun. Are you so preoccupied with commitments and pressures that you don't give yourself enough time for fun? Laughter is one of the best energy boosters around.
Coping with the mid-afternoon energy slump 
Most people feel drowsy after lunch. This mid-afternoon drop in energy levels is linked to the brain's circadian rhythm and is 'hard wired' into the human body.  Preventing this drop in energy may be impossible, but there are ways to reduce the slump, including: 

Introducing fatigue fighting strategies (above) into your lifestyle. A fit, healthy and well-rested body is less prone to severe drowsiness in the afternoon. 
Eating a combination of protein and carbohydrates - like a tuna sandwich - for lunch. Carbohydrates provide glucose for energy, and protein provides the amino acid tyrosine, which allows the brain to synthesize the neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine to keep your mind attentive and alert. 
Get moving! A brisk walk or even 10 minutes of stretching at your desk can improve your blood flow and boost your energy.
If you find yourself sleeping until the last possible second before dragging yourself out of bed, you may be wondering, "Why am I always tired?" Or maybe you just don't have the energy to get things done the way you once did. Fatigue and a lack of energy are a big problem for many people, but these problems can only be addressed if you know what is wrong.

If you are feeling constantly tired, the first thing you should do is see your personal physician for a checkup. Your doctor can take a careful history, perform a physical exam, and do any needed testing to determine the cause of your fatigue.

A few of the possible causes of fatigue include the following:

1
Lack of Sleep
Senior man in his early 60s with greying beard is sick and sleepless in bed while night.
EMS-FORSTER-PRO
While a lack of sleep may seem to be an obvious cause of chronic fatigue, it is a surprisingly common reason for feeling tired. Many people go through life feeling too stressed or too busy to slow down and get all of the sleep that they need to feel good.

While a lack of sleep isn't a medical condition per se, your doctor may be able to help you learn about ways to reduce your stress or prescribe medications to help you with occasional sleeplessness.

It's helpful to begin by determining your sleep needs. The "average" adult needs around eight hours per night, but few people are average. You may also have a sleep debt you have accumulated, and this requires extra sleep to catch up.

10 Ways to Sleep Better Tonight
2
Depression
Sad Afro american man
Ju
Depression is a condition believed to be caused abnormalities in mood-regulating chemicals called neurotransmitters in the brain.1﻿

People with depression tend to have problems with sleep and energy level. They may have trouble falling asleep or wake up during the night. Some people with depression may also have trouble waking up in the morning and sleep too long. Depression often makes people feel sluggish and unmotivated.

Some of the other symptoms of depression include feeling sad or empty, losing interest in activities that you once enjoyed, changes in appetite or weight, feeling worthless or guilty, and having recurring thoughts of death or suicide.

If you feel like you may be depressed, talk to your doctor. She may recommend that you also see a therapist who can help you work through your feelings. Untreated depression not only leads to tiredness but can affect every aspect of your life.

3
Anemia
woman feeling dizzy
Vanessa Clara

When you have anemia, your body either has a lower than normal number of red blood cells or it doesn't have enough hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is the substance which gives red blood cells their color. It is also involved in carrying oxygen throughout your body.

When you have too little hemoglobin or not enough red blood cells, your body doesn't get enough oxygen so you feel tired or weak. You may also have symptoms such as pale skin, shortness of breath, dizziness, or headaches.

Iron deficiency alone, even without anemia, is now thought to be a cause of chronic fatigue.2﻿

 A simple blood test at your doctor's office can tell you whether or not you have anemia. Keep in mind that anemia is not just iron deficiency and there are a great many possible causes.

4
Hypothyroidism
woman frowning on the scale with weight gain
Te
Hypothyroidism is a disease in which thyroid gland does not produce enough thyroid hormone. Thyroid disease is very common, especially in women, and affects 27 to 60 million people in the United States alone.

Thyroid hormones control your metabolism so that when levels are low, you may have symptoms of tiredness, weight gain, and feeling cold.3﻿

Making the condition even more confusing, hypothyroidism can mimic depression symptoms.

Thankfully, a simple blood test can determine if your thyroid gland is functioning up to par, and treatment can be instituted if not.

5
Heart Disease
Doctor talking to patient in office
Te

Heart disease, especially heart failure, can cause you to feel tired all of the time and unable to tolerate exercise. With heart failure, ​the heart is less effective in pumping oxygenated blood to muscles and other tissues in the body. Even your regular daily activities, like walking or carrying your groceries in from the car, can become difficult.

Other possible symptoms of heart disease include chest pain, palpitations, dizziness, fainting, and shortness of breath.

In recent years it's been noted that the symptoms of heart disease in women often differ from those in men and may be more subtle, for example, presenting as fatigue rather than chest pain. 4﻿It's thought that this lack of recognition of heart disease in women is a reason why women are more likely than men to die from the disease.

It's important to talk to your doctor about all of your symptoms as well as your family history of medical conditions. Based on these findings, you and your doctor may decide that further tests to evaluate your heart are needed.

6
Sleep Apnea
Woman sleeping with pillow over head
Brand New Images/Stone/Getty Images
Sleep apnea is a chronic condition in which there may be pauses in breathing, or shallow breathing, lasting anywhere from a few seconds to a minute while a person is sleeping. 5﻿These pauses and shallow breaths can occur as many as 30 times a minute. And, each time breathing returns to normal, often with a snort or a choking sound, it can be very disruptive to a person's sleep.

This disrupted and poor quality sleep can be a common cause of daytime sleepiness.

Other symptoms associated with sleep apnea include morning headaches, memory problems, poor concentration, irritability, depression, and a sore throat upon waking.

Your doctor will likely ask you if others have noticed problems with your sleep such as irregular breathing or snoring, and may also be concerned if you have risk factors for sleep apnea or experience daytime tiredness. A sleep study is often recommended to document sleep apnea, and if present, treatments such as CPAP may be recommended.

It's important to note that untreated sleep apnea not only results in tiredness, but can lead to heart disease, stroke, or even sudden death.

7
Hepatitis
woman who appears very tired seeing her doctor
PeopleImages.com/Getty Images
Hepatitis is an inflammation of the liver with several possible causes ranging from infections to obesity.

The liver serves many important functions in the body from breaking down toxins to manufacturing proteins that control blood clotting, to metabolizing and storing carbohydrates, and much more. When the liver is inflamed, these important processes can come to a halt.

In addition to being tired, some of the symptoms that you might experience with hepatitis include jaundice (a yellowish discoloration of the skin and whites of the eyes, abdominal pain, nausea, dark yellow urine, and light-colored stools.6﻿

Liver function tests are easily done in most clinics, and if abnormal, can lead you and your doctor to look for the possible causes.

8
Diabetes
woman talking with her doctor
LWA/D
Diabetes is a condition in which either the body doesn't make enough insulin or it doesn't use it as well as it should. Insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas that helps glucose get into the body's cells to be used for energy production. There are several reasons that diabetes may be causing you to feel tired all the time.

Other symptoms of diabetes include frequent urination, extreme thirst, unexplained weight loss, extreme hunger, sudden vision changes, tingling or numbness in the hands or feet, dry skin, slow-healing wounds or more infections than usual.

A simple blood sugar test can be done in most clinics, and a test called hemoglobin A1C can help determine what your average blood sugar has been over the past three months.

9
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
Girl in bed
Te
Chronic fatigue syndrome is a disorder characterized by intense fatigue that does not improve with rest and which may be made worse by physical or mental exertion. It is unknown what causes this condition.

In addition to debilitating fatigue, some of the other symptoms which define chronic fatigue syndrome include impairment in short-term memory or concentration, muscle and joint pain, headaches, tender lymph nodes, and frequent sore throat.

Feeling exhausted is so common that it has its own acronym, TATT, which stands for "tired all the time".

We all feel tired from time to time. The reasons are usually obvious and include:

too many late nights
long hours spent at work
a baby keeping you up at night
But tiredness or exhaustion that goes on for a long time is not normal. It can affect your ability to get on and enjoy your life.

Unexplained tiredness is one of the most common reasons for people to see their GP.

Why you might be tired all the time
Before you see a GP, you may want to work out how you became tired in the first place.

It can be helpful to think about:

parts of your life, such as work and family, that might be particularly tiring
any events that may have triggered your tiredness, such as bereavement or a relationship break-up
how your lifestyle may be making you tired
A GP will look at the following causes of tiredness:

psychological causes
physical causes
lifestyle causes
Psychological causes of tiredness
Psychological causes of tiredness are much more common than physical causes.

Most psychological causes lead to poor sleep or insomnia, both of which cause daytime tiredness.

Psychological causes include:

Stress
The strains of daily life can worry most of us at some point. It's also worth remembering that even positive events, such as moving house or getting married, can cause stress. 

Read more about how to deal with stress.

Emotional shock
A bereavement, redundancy or a relationship break-up can make you feel tired and exhausted.

Depression
If you feel sad, low and lacking in energy, and you also wake up tired, you may have depression.

Here's how to tell if you might have depression. See your GP if you think you are depressed.

Anxiety
If you have constant uncontrollable feelings of anxiety, you may have what doctors call generalised anxiety disorder (GAD).

As well as feeling worried and irritable, people with GAD often feel tired. See a GP, as medication and talking therapies can help.

If you think your tiredness may be a result of low mood or anxiety, try this short audio guide to dealing with your sleep problems.

Physical causes of tiredness
There are several health conditions that can make you feel tired or exhausted.

These include:

anaemia 
underactive thyroid
sleep apnoea
Tiredness can also be the result of:

pregnancy – particularly in the first 12 weeks
being overweight or obese – your body has to work harder to do everyday activities
being underweight – poor muscle strength can make you tire more easily
cancer treatments, such as radiotherapy and chemotherapy
carbon monoxide poisoning – especially if your gas boiler has not been serviced regularly
side effects of medicines and some herbal remedies
If you have been feeling constantly tired for more than 4 weeks, it's a good idea to see your GP so they can confirm or rule out a medical condition that could be causing your tiredness.

Read more about the medical causes of tiredness.

Lifestyle causes of tiredness
In today's 24/7 "always on" world, we often try to cram too much into our daily lives.

And to try to stay on top of things, we sometimes consume too much alcohol or caffeine, or eat sugary and high-fat snacks on the go rather than sitting down for a proper meal.

The main lifestyle causes of tiredness include:

Alcohol
Drinking too much interferes with the quality of your sleep. Stick to the guidelines of no more than 14 units a week for both men and women.

Read more about how to cut down on alcohol.

Exercise 
Too much or too little exercise can affect how tired you feel.

Read more about the benefits of exercise.

Caffeine
Too much of this stimulant, found in tea, coffee, colas and energy drinks, can upset sleep and make you feel wound-up as well as tired.

Try decaffeinated tea and coffee, or gradually cut out caffeine altogether.

Night shifts
Night workers often find they get tired more easily. This is more likely if the timing of the shifts keeps changing.

Daytime naps
If you're tired, you may nap during the day, which can make it more difficult to get a good night's sleep.

Read more about how to change your lifestyle habits to boost your energy.

Feeling tired on a regular basis is extremely common. In fact, about one-third of healthy teens, adults and older individuals report feeling sleepy or fatigued (1Trusted Source, 2, 3Trusted Source).

Fatigue is a common symptom of several conditions and serious diseases, but in most cases it is caused by simple lifestyle factors.

Fortunately, these are most often easy things to fix.

This article lists 10 potential reasons why you're always tired and provides recommendations for ways to get your energy back.

1. Consuming Too Many Refined Carbs
Carbs can be a quick source of energy. When you eat them, your body breaks them down into sugar, which can be used for fuel.

However, eating too many refined carbs can actually cause you to feel tired throughout the day.

When sugar and processed carbs are consumed, they cause a rapid rise in your blood sugar. This signals your pancreas to produce a large amount of insulin to get the sugar out of your blood and into your cells.

This spike in blood sugar levels — and subsequent fall — can make you feel exhausted. Craving quick energy, you instinctively reach for another serving of refined carbs, which can lead to a vicious cycle.

Several studies have found that minimizing sugar and processed carbs at meals and snacks typically leads to greater energy levels (4Trusted Source, 5Trusted Source, 6Trusted Source).

In one study, children who ate snacks high in refined carbs before a soccer game reported more fatigue than children who ate a peanut butter-based snack (6Trusted Source).

Luckily, research suggests that some foods may help protect against tiredness.

For instance, both okra and dried bonito broth contain compounds that may decrease fatigue and increase alertness (7Trusted Source, 8Trusted Source).

To keep your energy levels stable, replace sugar and refined carbs with whole foods that are rich in fiber, such as vegetables and legumes.

SUMMARY:
Consuming refined carbs can lead to unstable blood sugar levels, which can make you feel tired. Instead, choose whole foods that minimally impact your blood sugar.
2. Living a Sedentary Lifestyle
Inactivity could be the root cause of your low energy.

But many people say they're too tired to exercise.

In fact, in one recent study, this was the most common reason that middle-aged and older adults gave for not exercising (9Trusted Source).

One explanation could be chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), which is characterized by extreme, unexplained fatigue on a daily basis.

Research suggests people with CFS tend to have low strength and endurance levels, which limit their exercise ability. However, a review of studies including more than 1,500 people found that exercise may reduce fatigue in those with CFS (10Trusted Source, 11Trusted Source).

Research has also shown that exercising can reduce fatigue among healthy people and those with other illnesses, such as cancer. What's more, even minimal increases in physical activity seem to be beneficial (12Trusted Source, 13Trusted Source, 14Trusted Source, 15Trusted Source, 16Trusted Source).

To boost your energy levels, replace sedentary behaviors with active ones. For instance, stand rather than sit down whenever possible, take the stairs instead of the elevator and walk instead of driving short distances.

SUMMARY:
Being sedentary can lead to fatigue in healthy people, as well as those with chronic fatigue syndrome or other health problems. Being more active can help boost energy levels.
3. Not Getting Enough High-Quality Sleep
Not getting enough sleep is one of the more obvious causes of fatigue.

Your body does many things while you sleep, including store memory and release hormones that regulate your metabolism and energy levels (17Trusted Source).

After a night of high-quality sleep, you typically wake up feeling refreshed, alert and energized.

According to the American Academy of Sleep Medicine and Sleep Research Society, adults need an average of seven hours of sleep per night for optimal health (18Trusted Source).

Importantly, sleep should be restful and uninterrupted in order to allow your brain to go through all five stages of each sleep cycle (19Trusted Source).

In addition to getting enough sleep, maintaining a regular sleep routine also seems to help prevent tiredness.

In one study, adolescents who went to bed at the same time on weekdays and weekends reported less fatigue and less difficulty falling asleep than those who stayed up later and slept fewer hours on the weekends (20Trusted Source).

Being physically active during the day may help you get more restorative sleep at night. One study in older people found that exercising helped improve their sleep quality and reduce levels of fatigue (21Trusted Source).

Furthermore, napping may help boost energy levels. Taking naps has been shown to decrease tiredness in pilots, who often experience fatigue due to long working hours and jet lag (22Trusted Source).

To improve the amount and quality of your sleep, go to bed at roughly the same time every night, relax before sleeping and get plenty of activity during the day.

However, if you find it difficult to fall or stay asleep and suspect you may have a sleeping disorder, speak to your doctor about having your sleep evaluated by a specialist.

SUMMARY:
Inadequate or poor-quality sleep is a common cause of fatigue. Getting several hours of uninterrupted sleep allows your body and brain to recharge, allowing you to feel energized during the day.
4. Food Sensitivities
Food sensitivities or intolerances typically cause symptoms like rashes, digestive problems, runny nose or headaches.

But fatigue is another symptom that's often overlooked.

Also, research suggests that quality of life may be more affected by fatigue in those with food sensitivities (23Trusted Source).

Common food intolerances include gluten, dairy, eggs, soy and corn.

If you suspect that certain foods may be making you tired, consider working with an allergist or dietitian who can test you for food sensitivities or prescribe an elimination diet to determine which foods are problematic.

SUMMARY:
Food intolerances can cause fatigue or low energy levels. Following a food elimination diet may help determine which foods you are sensitive to.
5. Not Eating Enough Calories
Consuming too few calories can cause feelings of exhaustion.

Calories are units of energy found in food. Your body uses them to move and fuel processes like breathing and maintaining a constant body temperature.

When you eat too few calories, your metabolism slows down in order to conserve energy, potentially causing fatigue.

Your body can function within a range of calories depending on your weight, height, age and other factors.

However, most people require a minimum of 1,200 calories per day to prevent a metabolic slowdown.

Experts on aging believe that although metabolism decreases with age, older people may need to eat at the top of their calorie range in order to perform normal functions without becoming fatigued (24Trusted Source).

In addition, it's difficult to meet your vitamin and mineral needs when calorie intake is too low. Not getting enough vitamin D, iron and other important nutrients can also lead to fatigue.

In order to keep your energy levels up, avoid drastic cuts in calorie intake, even if your goal is weight loss. You can calculate your calorie needs using the calorie calculator in this article.

SUMMARY:
Your body requires a minimum number of calories in order to perform daily functions. Consuming too few calories can lead to fatigue and make it difficult to meet nutrient needs.
6. Sleeping at the Wrong Time
In addition to inadequate sleep, sleeping at the wrong time can reduce your energy.

Sleeping during the day instead of at night disrupts your body's circadian rhythm, which are the biological changes that occur in response to light and darkness during a 24-hour cycle.

Research has found that when your sleep pattern is out of sync with your circadian rhythm, chronic fatigue may develop (25Trusted Source).

This is a common problem among people who perform shift or night work.

Sleep experts estimate that 2–5% of all shift workers suffer from a sleep disorder characterized by excessive sleepiness or disrupted sleep over a period of one month or more (26Trusted Source).

What's more, even staying awake during the night for a day or two can cause fatigue.

In one study, healthy young men were allowed to sleep either seven hours or just under five hours before being kept awake for 21–23 hours. Their fatigue ratings increased before and after sleep, regardless of the number of hours they slept (27Trusted Source).

It's best to sleep during the night whenever possible.

However, if your job involves shift work, there are strategies to retrain your body clock, which should improve your energy levels.

In one study, shift workers reported significantly less fatigue and better mood after being exposed to bright light pulses, wearing dark sunglasses outside and sleeping in total darkness (28Trusted Source).

Using glasses to block blue light may also help people who perform shift work.

SUMMARY:
Sleeping during the day can upset your body's natural rhythm and lead to fatigue. Try to sleep at night or retrain your body clock.
7. Not Getting Enough Protein
Inadequate protein intake could be contributing to your fatigue.

Consuming protein has been shown to boost your metabolic rate more than carbs or fat do (29Trusted Source).

In addition to aiding weight loss, this may also help prevent tiredness.

In one study, self-reported fatigue levels were significantly lower among Korean college students who reported eating high-protein foods like fish, meat, eggs and beans at least twice a day (5Trusted Source).

Other studies have found that high-protein diets tend to produce less fatigue among weight lifters and people who perform resistance training (30Trusted Source, 31Trusted Source).

What's more, research suggests that fatigue may be reduced by branched-chain amino acids, which are the building blocks of protein (32Trusted Source).

To keep your metabolism strong and prevent fatigue, aim to consume a high-quality protein source at every meal.

SUMMARY:
Consuming adequate protein is important for keeping your metabolism up and preventing fatigue. Include a good protein source at every meal.
8. Inadequate Hydration
Staying well hydrated is important for maintaining good energy levels.

The many biochemical reactions that take place in your body every day result in a loss of water that needs to be replaced.

Dehydration occurs when you don't drink enough liquid to replace the water lost in your urine, stools, sweat and breath.

Several studies have shown that being even mildly dehydrated can lead to lower energy levels and a decreased ability to concentrate (33Trusted Source, 34Trusted Source, 35Trusted Source).

In one study, when men worked out on a treadmill and lost 1% of their body mass in fluid, they reported more fatigue than when they performed the same exercise while remaining well hydrated (33Trusted Source).

Although you may have heard that you should drink eight, 8-ounce (237-ml) glasses of water daily, you may require more or less than this depending on your weight, age, gender and level of activity.

The key is drinking enough to maintain good hydration levels. Here are some common signs of dehydration.

SUMMARY:
Even mild dehydration may reduce energy levels and alertness. Make sure to drink enough to replace fluid lost during the day.
9. Relying on Energy Drinks
There's no shortage of beverages that promise to provide quick energy.

Popular energy drinks typically include the following:

Caffeine
Sugar
Amino acids
Large doses of B vitamins
Herbs
It's true that these beverages may provide a temporary energy boost due to their high caffeine and sugar contents (36Trusted Source, 37Trusted Source).

For example, a study in sleep-deprived healthy adults found that consuming an energy shot led to modest improvements in alertness and mental function (37Trusted Source).

Unfortunately, these energy drinks are also likely to set you up for rebound fatigue when the effects of caffeine and sugar wear off.

One review of 41 studies found that although energy drinks led to increased alertness and improved mood for several hours after consumption, excessive daytime sleepiness often occurred the following day (38Trusted Source).

Although the caffeine content varies widely among brands, an energy shot may contain up to 350 mg, and some energy drinks provide as much as 500 mg per can. By comparison, coffee typically contains between 77–150 mg of caffeine per cup (39Trusted Source).

However, even at smaller dosages, drinking caffeinated beverages in the afternoon may interfere with sleep and lead to low energy levels the following day (40Trusted Source).

To break the cycle, try cutting back and gradually weaning yourself off these energy drinks. In addition, limit coffee and other caffeinated beverage consumption to early in the day.

SUMMARY:
Energy drinks contain caffeine and other ingredients that can provide a temporary energy boost, but often lead to rebound fatigue.
10. High Stress Levels
Chronic stress may have a profound effect on your energy levels and quality of life.

Although some stress is normal, excessive levels of stress have been linked to fatigue in several studies (41Trusted Source, 42Trusted Source, 43Trusted Source).

In addition, your response to stress can influence how tired you feel.

One study in college students found that avoiding dealing with stress led to the greatest level of fatigue (43Trusted Source).

While you may not be able to avoid stressful situations, developing strategies for managing your stress may help prevent you from feeling completely exhausted.

For instance, large reviews of studies suggest yoga and meditation can help relieve stress (44Trusted Source, 45Trusted Source).

Engaging in these or similar mind-body practices may ultimately help you feel more energetic and better able to cope with stress.

SUMMARY:
Excessive stress can cause fatigue and reduce your quality of life. Practicing stress-reduction techniques may help improve your energy levels.
The Bottom Line
There are many possible causes for feeling chronically tired. It's important to rule out medical conditions first, as fatigue often accompanies illness.

However, feeling overly tired may be related to what you eat and drink, how much activity you get or the way you manage stress.

The good news is that making a few lifestyle changes may very well improve your energy levels and overall quality of life.
The good response to our first contest has prompted us to repeat it in 2019. Not only because the unabated destruction of our environment has made an early end of our civilization likelier than ever, but also because many story-telling opportunities were left unused in the previous contest.

The whole point of this magazine is to raise awareness of the harm that we are doing to our planet and the dire consequences this will have. Our fact sheet (link) lists many of the threats facing our environment and society. We are heading for multiple apocalyptic disasters, not in the distant future but in a matter of decades, if we are lucky, or years, if we are not. 

All prior calamities will pale into insignificance when the house of cards that we call our civilization collapses. We have little to fall back on, no plan B, just a depleted planet that can feed only a fraction of humanity when all our excessive and unsustainable attainments fail.

Climate change alone will have a devastating effect. We know that rising temperatures are going to cause ever greater natural disasters. Extreme weather will make large parts of the world uninhabitable for humans. This will mean mass migrations, on a scale never seen before. These people will be truly desperate, with nothing to lose, nothing to go back to, making them unstoppable.

The world economy, largely based on debt as it is, will not survive these natural and social disasters. It will implode, aggravating all other problems.

The notion that in the end, like in the movies, we shall solve all these problems because we are so clever is flatly contradicted by the fact that we created these problems in the first place. A truly clever species would never have let that happen. Now it's too late. Several apocalyptic events cannot be prevented anymore, even if we wanted to try, which we obviously don’t, because it will cost money. The only question now is how we are going to emerge from these disasters: with some remnants of civilization or as cave men and cave women.

These facts should offer the creative writer a wealth of inspiration. All the ingredients for high drama are here: floods, fires, droughts, famines, violent migrations, wars of survival, cannibalism, et cetera.

This is the setting for the short stories that we want to publish. The stories from the first contest in this magazine are excellent examples of what we are looking for. 
See: 
The top ten
The twenty runners-up
What we don’t like to see are stories that ignore the manmade causes of our downfall and simply embark on wild post-apocalyptic fantasies. They have no cautionary value. And that is ultimately what all this is about. An attempt to bring humans to their senses, by conceiving the inconceivable, showing them what they are doing and what this is going to do to them and their loved ones.

Being a non-profit organization we don’t have lots of money to throw around. Nevertheless we offer US$1,000 for the winner, US$300 for the runner-up and US$100 for number 3. There may also be some hideous trophies and a little fame, but most of all the satisfaction of making a contribution to the welfare of our planet and all its inhabitants.

The rules are as follows:
This writing contest (or writing competition) will open for entries on 1 September 2019 and will close on 31 October 2019 at 23:59 Coordinated Universal Time (check local time differences).
This is a free contest again. We had planned to ask an entry fee, but have thought the better of it.
It is open to anyone, from any country, of any age.
Winners will be announced in late 2019/early 2020.
The story should be in digital form, Microsoft Word or PDF. This is important! Files that cannot be opened may be disqualified.
Each contestant may enter only one story.
Formatting in accordance with common practice; see the internet, for instance:
William Shunn
Scribophile
Preferred word count between 1500 and 5000 words. The better the story, the greater the margin may be, within reason.
The winners will be published in the next annual contest issue of this magazine, planned for January 2020.
Stories outside the top 3 may still be published for the usual flat fee of US$25 paid by us.
We buy non-exclusive, one-time rights for online publication during a period of 6 months, with an option to repeat this for the same payment of US$25.
Payments will be made via PayPal or be mailed. Other forms of payment are too cumbersome and expensive.
Simultaneous submissions are fine.
Publications elsewhere are not a problem either.
Stories are to be uploaded by filling out the form that will appear below as soon as the entry period opens.

When he wasn’t solving the mysteries of black holes and revolutionizing theoretical physics, Stephen Hawking spoke (a lot) about how the world would end.

From Terminator-style robots taking over to Donald Trump, these are some of the late scientist’s most terrifying doomsday predictions.

Earth will turn into a giant fireball

Humanity is at a “tipping point,” Hawking warned last July.

He added that global warming would cause the Earth to become like Venus, with a global temperature of 482 degrees Fahrenheit and sulphuric acid raining from the sky.

“By the year 2600, the world’s population would be standing shoulder to shoulder and the electricity consumption would make the Earth glow red-hot,” he told a gathering of scientists in Beijing, China.

Our best bet is to leave Earth completely, predicted Hawking.

The AI apocalypse will see robots replace humans

Enlarge Image
©Paramount/Courtesy Everett Col
Facebook and Google are obsessed with artificial intelligence, but Hawking didn’t trust it one bit.

He claimed it could be the “worst invention of the history of our civilization.”

Speaking to Wired UK, he said: “I fear that AI may replace humans altogether.”

“If people design computer viruses, someone will design AI that improves and replicates itself. This will be a new form of life that outperforms humans.”

Nuclear war could kill us all

Enlarge Image
North Korea’s intermediate-range strategic ballistic rocket Hwasong-12 lifting off from the launching pad at an undisclosed location near Pyongyang.Getty Images
When asked what human trait he’d like to change, Hawking replied, “Aggression.”

He said it could lead to irrational behavior, like sparking nuclear war and ending the world.

“There is no sign of conflict lessening and the development of militarized technology and weapons of mass destruction could make that disastrous,” he told the BBC, as part of his 75th birthday celebrations.

“The best hope for the survival of the human race might be independent colonies in space.”

We need to get busy finding another planet

Enlarge Image
An artist’s concept illustrates the two Saturn-size planets discovered by NASA’s Kepler mission.NASA
Fearing that our planet will become overpopulated, Hawking predicted that humans will have to leave Earth and repopulate elsewhere.

In a documentary titled “Stephen Hawking: Expedition New Earth,” he warned that if humans don’t become a multi-planetary species and settle on other worlds, we could die out in the next century.

Trump will shove the Earth over the brink

Enlarge Image
Getty Images
Hawking was clearly not a fan of Donald Trump.

When the president announced his decision to withdraw from the Paris climate agreement to reduce CO2 levels, Hawking became one of his most outspoken opponents.

Speaking to the BBC, he said: “By … pulling out of the Paris Climate Agreement, Donald Trump will cause avoidable environmental damage to our beautiful planet, endangering the natural world, for us and our children.”

Once upon a time in America, we could all argue about whether or not US global power was declining. Now, most observers have little doubt that the end is just a matter of timing and circumstance. Ten years ago, I predicted that, by 2025, it would be all over for American power, a then-controversial comment that’s commonplace today. Under President Donald Trump, the once “indispensable nation” that won World War II and built a new world order has become dispensable indeed.

The decline and fall of American global power is, of course, nothing special in the great sweep of history. After all, in the 4,000 years since humanity’s first empire formed in the Fertile Crescent, at least 200 empires have risen, collided with other imperial powers, and in time collapsed. In the past century alone, two dozen modern imperial states have fallen and the world has managed just fine in the wake of their demise.

The global order didn’t blink when the sprawling Soviet empire imploded in 1991, freeing its 15 “republics” and seven “satellites” to become 22 newly capitalist nations. Washington took that epochal event largely in stride. There were no triumphal demonstrations, in the tradition of ancient Rome, with manacled Russian captives and their plundered treasures paraded down Pennsylvania Avenue. Instead, a Manhattan real-estate developer bought a 20-foot chunk of the Berlin Wall for display near Madison Avenue, a sight barely noticed by busy shoppers.

For those trying to track global trends for the next decade or two, the real question is not the fate of American global hegemony, but the future of the world order it began building at the peak of its power, not in 1991, but right after World War II. For the past 75 years, Washington’s global dominion has rested on a “delicate duality.” The raw realpolitik of US military bases, multinational corporations, CIA coups, and foreign military interventions has been balanced, even softened, by a surprisingly liberal world order—with sovereign states meeting as equals at the United Nations, an international rule of law that muted armed conflict, a World Health Organization that actually eradicated epidemic diseases which had plagued humanity for generations, and a developmental effort led by the World Bank that lifted 40% of humanity out of poverty.

Some observers remain supremely confident that Washington’s world order can survive the inexorable erosion of its global power. Princeton political scientist G. John Ikenberry, for example, has essentially staked his reputation on that debatable proposition. As US decline first became apparent in 2011, he argued that Washington’s ability to shape world politics would diminish, but “the liberal international order will survive and thrive,” preserving its core elements of multilateral governance, free trade, and human rights. Seven years later, amid a rise of anti-global nationalists across significant parts of the planet, he remains optimistic that the American-made world order will endure because international issues such as climate change make its “protean vision of interdependence and cooperation… more important as the century unfolds.”

This sense of guarded optimism is widely shared among foreign-policy elites in the New York-Washington corridor of power. The president of the influential Council on Foreign Relations, Richard Haass, has typically argued that the “post-Cold War order cannot be restored, but the world is not yet on the edge of a systemic crisis.” Through deft diplomacy, Washington could still save the planet from “deeper disarray” or even “trends that spell catastrophe.”

But is it true that the decline of the planet’s “sole superpower” (as it was once known) will no more shake the present world order than the Soviet collapse once did? To explore what it takes to produce just such an implosion of a world order, it’s necessary to turn to history—to the history, in fact, of collapsing imperial orders and a changing planet.

CURRENT ISSUE
 
View our current issue
Subscribe today and Save up to $129.

Admittedly, such analogies are always imperfect, yet what other guide to the future do we have but the past? Among its many lessons: that world orders are far more fundamental than we might imagine and that their uprooting requires a perfect storm of history’s most powerful forces. Indeed, the question of the moment should be: Is climate change now gathering sufficient destructive force to cripple Washington’s liberal world order and create an opening for Beijing’s decidedly illiberal one or possibly even a new world in which such orders will be unrecognizable?

EMPIRES AND WORLD ORDERS
Despite the aura of awe-inspiring power they give off, empires have often been the ephemeral creations of an individual conqueror like Alexander the Great or Napoleon that fade fast after his death or defeat. World orders are, by contrast, far more deeply rooted. They are resilient global systems created by a convergence of economic, technological, and ideological forces. On the surface, they entail a diplomatic entente among nations, while at a deeper level they entwine themselves within the cultures, commerce, and values of countless societies. World orders influence the languages people speak, the laws they live by, and the ways they work, worship, and even play. World orders are woven into the fabric of civilization itself. To uproot them takes an extraordinary event or set of events, even a global catastrophe.

Looking back over the last millennium, old orders die and new ones arise when a cataclysm, marked by mass death or a maelstrom of destruction, coincides with some slower yet sweeping social transformation. Since the age of European exploration started in the 15th century, some 90 empires, large and small, have come and gone. In those same centuries, however, there have been only three major world orders—the Iberian age (1494–1805), the British imperial era (1815-1914), and the Washington world system (1945–2025).

Such global orders are not the mere imaginings of historians trying, so many decades or centuries later, to impose some logic upon a chaotic past. Those three powers—Spain, Britain, and the United States—consciously tried to re-order their worlds for, they hoped, generations to come through formal agreements—the Treaty of Tordesillas in 1494, the Congress of Vienna in 1815, and the San Francisco conference that drafted the UN charter in 1945. Should Beijing succeed Washington as the world’s preeminent power, future historians will likely look back on its Belt and Road Forum, which brought 130 nations to Beijing in 2017, as the formal start of the Chinese era.

Each of these treaties shaped a world in the most fundamental ways, articulating universal principles that would define the nature of nations and the rights of all humans within them for decades to come. Over this span of 500 years, these three world orders conducted what could be seen, in retrospect, as a continuing debate over the nature of human rights and the limits of state sovereignty over vast stretches of the planet.

In their spread across disparate lands, world orders become coalitions of contending, even contradictory, social forces—diverse peoples, rival nations, competing classes. When deftly balanced, such a system can survive for decades, even centuries, by subsuming those contending forces within broadly shared interests. As tensions swell into contradictions, however, a cataclysm in the form of war or natural disaster can catalyze otherwise simmering conflicts—allowing challenges from rival powers, revolts by subordinate social orders, or both.


THE IBERIAN AGE
During the last thousand years, the first of these transformative cataclysms was certainly the Black Death of 1350, one of history’s greatest waves of mass mortality via disease, this one spread by rats carrying infected lice from Central Asia across Europe. In just six years, this pandemic killed up to 60% of Europe’s population, leaving some 50 million dead. As lesser yet still lethal epidemics recurred at least eight times over the next half-century, the world’s population fell sharply from an estimated 440 million to just 350 million people, a crash from which it would not fully recover for another two centuries.

Historians have long argued that the plague caused lasting labor shortages, slashing revenues on feudal estates and so forcing aristocrats to seek alternative income through warfare. The result: a century of incessant conflict across France, Italy, and Spain. But few historians have explored the broader geopolitical impact of this demographic disaster. After nearly a millennium, it seems to have ended the Middle Ages with its system of localized states and relatively stable regional empires, while unleashing the gathering forces of merchant capital, maritime trade, and military technology to, quite literally, set the world in motion.

As Tamerlane’s horsemen swept across Central Asia and the Ottoman Turks occupied southeast Europe (while also capturing Constantinople, the Byzantine empire’s capital, in 1453), Iberia’s kingdoms turned seaward for a century of exploration. Not only did they extend their growing imperial power to four continents (Africa, Asia, and both Americas), but they also created the first truly global order worthy of the name, commingling commerce, conquest, and religious conversion on a global scale.

Starting in 1420, thanks to advances in navigation and naval warfare, including the creation of the agile caravel gunship, Portuguese mariners pushed south, rounded Africa, and eventually built some 50 fortified ports from Southeast Asia to Brazil. This would allow them to dominate much of world trade for more than a century. Somewhat later, Spanish conquistadores followed Columbus across the Atlantic to conquer the Aztec and Incan empires, occupying significant parts of the Americas.

Just weeks after Columbus completed his first voyage in 1493, Pope Alexander VI issued a decree awarding the Spanish crown perpetual sovereignty over all lands west of a mid-Atlantic line so “that barbarous nations be overthrown and brought to the [Catholic] faith.” He also affirmed an earlier Papal bull (Romanus Pontifex, 1455) that gave Portugal’s king rights to “subdue all Saracens and pagans” east of that line, “reduce their persons to perpetual slavery,” and “possess these islands, lands, harbors,and seas.”

To settle just where that line actually lay, Spanish and Portuguese diplomats met for months in 1494 in the tiny city of Tordesillas for high-stakes negotiations, producing a treaty that split the non-Christian world between them and officially launched the Iberian age. In its expansive definition of national sovereignty, this treaty allowed European states to acquire “barbarous nations” by conquest and make entire oceans into amare clausum, or a closed sea, through exploration. This diplomacy would also impose a rigid religious-cum-racial segregation upon humanity that would persist for another five centuries.

Even as they rejected Iberia’s global land grab, other European states contributed to the formation of that distinctive world order. King Francis I of France typically demanded “to see the clause of Adam’s will by which I should be denied my share of the world.” Nonetheless, he accepted the principle of European conquest and later sent navigator Giovanni da Verrazzano to explore North America and claim what became Canada for France.

SUBSCRIBE TO THE NATION  FOR $2 A MONTH.
Get unlimited digital access to the best independent news and analysis.

 
A century after, when Protestant Dutch mariners defied Catholic Portugal’s mare clausum by seizing one of its merchant ships off Singapore, their jurist Hugo Grotius argued persuasively, in his 1609 treatise Mare Liberum (“Freedom of the Seas”), that the sea like the air is “so limitless that it cannot become a possession of any one.” For the next 400 years, the twin diplomatic principles of open seas and conquered colonies would remain foundational for the international order.

Sustained by mercantile profits and inspired by missionary zeal, this diffuse global order proved surprisingly resilient, surviving for three full centuries. By the start of the 18th century, however, Europe’s absolutist states had descended into destructive internecine conflicts, notably the War of Spanish Succession (1701-1714) and a global Seven Years War (1756-1763). Moreover, the royal chartered companies—British, Dutch, and French—that by then ran those empires were proving ever less capable of effective colonial rule and increasingly inept at producing profits.

After two centuries of dominion, the French East India Company liquidated in 1794 and its venerable Dutch counterpart collapsed only five years later. Final fatal blows to these absolutist regimes were delivered by the American, French, and Haitian revolutions that erupted between 1776 and 1804.

THE BRITISH IMPERIAL ERA
The British imperial age emerged from the cataclysmic Napoleonic Wars that unleashed the transformative power of England’s innovations in industry and global finance. For 12 years, 1803 to 1815, those wars proved to be a Black Death-style maelstrom that roiled Europe, leaving six million dead in their wake and reaching India, Southeast Asia, and the Americas.

By the time the Emperor Napoleon disappeared into exile, France, stripped of many of its overseas colonies, had been reduced to secondary status in Europe, while its erstwhile ally, Spain, was so weakened that it would soon lose its Latin American empire. Propelled by a tumultuous and historic economic transformation, Britain suddenly faced no serious European rival and found itself free to create and oversee a bifurcated world order in which sovereignty remained a right and reality only in Europe and parts of the Americas, while much of the rest of the planet was subject to imperial dominion.

Admittedly, the destruction caused by the Napoleonic wars may seem relatively modest compared to the devastation of the Black Death, but the long-term changes engendered by Britain’s industrial revolution and the finance capitalism that emerged from those wars proved far more compelling than the earlier era’s merchant companies and missionary endeavors. From 1815 to 1914, London presided over an expanding global system marked by industry, capital exports, and colonial conquests, all spurred by the integration of the planet via railroad, steamship, telegraph, and ultimately radio. In contrast to the weak royal companies of the earlier age, this version of imperialism combined modern corporations with direct colonial rule in a way that allowed for far more efficient exploitation of local resources. No surprise, then, that some scholars have called Britain’s century of dominion the “first age of globalization.”

While British industry and finance were quintessentially modern, its imperial age extended key international principles of centuries past, even if in grim secular guise. While the Dutch doctrine of “freedom of the seas” allowed the British navy to rule the waves, the earlier religious justification for domination was replaced by a racialist ideology that legitimized European efforts to conquer and colonize the half of humanity whom the imperialist poet Rudyard Kipling branded the “lesser breeds.”

Although the 1815 Congress of Vienna officially launched the British era by eliminating France as a rival, the 1885 Berlin Conference on Africa truly defined the age. Much as the Portuguese and Spanish had done at Tordesillas in 1494, the 14 imperial powers (including the United States) present at Berlin four centuries later justified carving up the entire continent of Africa by proclaiming a self-serving commitment “to watch over the preservation of the native tribes and to care for the improvement of the conditions of their moral and material well-being.” Just as that designation of Africans as “native tribes” instead of “nations” or “peoples” denied them both sovereignty and human rights, so the British century witnessed eight empires subjecting nearly half of humanity to colonial rule premised on racial inferiority.

Only a century after its founding, however, the contradictions that lurked within Great Britain’s global rule erupted, thanks to the way that two cataclysmic world wars coincided with the long-term rise of anti-colonial nationalism to create our current world order. The alliance system among rival empires proved volatile, exploding into murderous conflicts in 1914 and again in 1939. Worse yet, industrialization had spawned the battleship and the airship as engines for warfare of unprecedented range and destructive power, while modern science would also create nuclear weapons with the power to potentially destroy the planet itself. Meanwhile, the colonies that covered nearly half the globe refused to abide by the institutionalized denial of the very liberty, humanity, and sovereignty that Europe prized for itself.

While most of the 15 million combat deaths in World War I emerged from the destructive nature of trench warfare on the western front in France (compounded by 100 million fatalities worldwide from an influenza pandemic), World War II spread its devastation globally, killing more than 60 million people and ravaging cities across Europe and Asia. With Europe struggling to recover, its empires could no longer constrain colonial cries for independence. Just two decades after the war’s end, the six European overseas empires that had dominated much of Asia and Africa for five centuries gave way to 100 new nations.

WASHINGTON’S WORLD ORDER
In the aftermath of history’s most destructive war, the United States used its unmatched power to form the Washington world system. American deaths in World War II numbered 418,000, but those losses paled before the 24 million dead in Russia, the 20 million more in China, and the 19 million in Europe. While industries across Europe, Russia, and Japan were damaged or destroyed and much of Eurasia was ravaged, the United States found itself left with a vibrant economy on a war footing and half the world’s industrial capacity. With much of Europe and Asia suffering from mass hunger, the swelling surpluses of American agriculture fed a famished humanity.

Washington’s visionary world order took form at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in 1944. There, 44 Allied nations created an international financial system exemplified by the World Bank and then, at San Francisco in 1945, by a UN charter to form a community of sovereign nations. In a striking blow for human progress, this new order resoundingly rejected the religious and racial divisions of the previous five centuries, proclaiming in the UN’s Universal Declaration of Human Rights the “equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family,” which “should be protected by the rule of law.”

Within a decade after the end of World War II, Washington also had 500 overseas military bases ringing Eurasia and a chain of mutual defense pacts stretching from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to the Australia, New Zealand, United States Security Treaty (ANZUS), and a globe-girding armada of nuclear-armed warships and strategic bombers. To exercise its version of global dominion, Washington retained the 17th-century Dutch doctrine of “freedom of the seas,” later extending it even to space where, for more than half a century, its military satellites have orbited without restraint.

Just as the British imperial system was far more pervasive and powerful than its Iberian predecessor, so Washington’s world order went beyond both of them, becoming rigorously systematic and deeply embedded in every aspect of planetary life. While the 1815 Congress of Vienna was an ephemeral gathering of two dozen diplomats whose influence faded within a decade, the United Nations and its 193 member states have, for nearly 75 years, sustained 44,000 permanent staff to supervise global health, human rights, education, law, labor, gender relations, development, food, culture, peacekeeping, and refugees. In addition to such broad governance, the UN also hosts treaties that are meant to regulate sea, space, and the climate.

Not only did the Bretton Woods conference create a global financial system, but it also led to the formation of the World Trade Organization that regulates commerce among 124 member states. You might imagine, then, that such an extraordinarily comprehensive system, integrated into almost every aspect of international intercourse, would be able to survive even major upheavals.

CATACLYSM AND COLLAPSE
Yet there is mounting evidence that climate change, as it accelerates, is creating the basis for the sort of cataclysm that will be capable of shaking even such a deeply rooted world order. The cascading effects of global warming will be ever more evident, not in the distant future of 2100 (as once thought), but within just 20 years, impacting the lives of most adults alive today.

Last October, scientists with the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change issued a “doomsday report,” warning that humanity had just 12 years left to cut carbon emissions by a striking 45% or the world’s temperature would rise by at least 1.5 degrees Celsius above preindustrial levels by about 2040. This, in turn, would bring significant coastal flooding, ever more intense storms, fierce drought, wildfires, and heat waves with damage that might add up to as much as $54 trillion—well over half the current size of the global economy. Within a few decades after that, global warming would, absent heroic measures, reach a dangerous 2 degrees Celsius, with even more devastation.

In January, scientists, using new data from sophisticated floating sensors,reported that the world’s oceans were heating 40% faster than estimated only five years earlier, unleashing powerful storms with frequent coastal flooding. Sooner or later, sea levels might rise by a full foot thanks to nothing but the thermal expansion of existing waters. Simultaneous reports showed that the rise in world air temperature has already made the last five years the hottest in recorded history, bringing ever more powerful hurricanes and raging wildfires to the United States with damages totaling $306 billion in 2017. And that hefty sum should be considered just the most modest of down payments on what’s to come.

Surprisingly fast-melting ice sheets in Greenland and the Antarctic will only intensify the impact of climate change. An anticipated rise in sea level of eight inches by 2050 could double coastal flooding in tropical latitudes—with devastating impacts on millions of people in low-lying Bangladesh and the mega-cities of southeastern Asia from Mumbai to Saigon and Guangzhou. Meltwater from Greenland is also disrupting the North Atlantic’s “overturning circulation” that regulates the region’s climate and is destined to produce yet more extreme weather events. Meanwhile, Antarctic meltwater will trap warm water under the surface, accelerating the break-up of the West Antarctic ice shelf and contributing to a rise in ocean levels that could hit 20 inches by 2100.

In sum, an ever-escalating tempo of climate change over the coming decades is likely to produce massive damage to the infrastructure that sustains human life. Seven hundred years later, humanity could be facing another catastrophe on the scale of the Black Death, one that might, once again, set the world in motion.

The geopolitical impact of climate change may be felt most immediately in the Mediterranean basin, home to 466 million people, where temperatures in 2016 had already reached 1.3 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. (The current global average was still around 0.85 degrees.) This means that the threat of devastating drought is going to be brought to a historically dry region bordered by sprawling deserts in North Africa and the Middle East. In a telling example of how climate catastrophe can erase an entire world order, around 1200 BC the eastern Mediterranean suffered a protracted drought that “caused crop failures, dearth, and famine,” sweeping away Late Bronze Age civilizations like the Greek Mycenaean cities, the Hittite empire, and the New Kingdom in Egypt.

From 2007 to 2010, ongoing global warming caused the “worst three-year drought” in Syria’s recorded history—precipitating unrest marked by “massive agricultural failures” that drove 1.5 million people into city slums and, next, by a devastating civil war that, starting in 2011, forced five million refugees to flee that country. As more than a million migrants, led by 350,000 Syrians, poured into Europe in 2015, the European Union (EU) plunged into political crisis. Anti-immigrant parties soon gained in popularity and power across the continent while Britain voted for its own chaotic Brexit.

Projecting the Middle East’s history, ancient and modern, into the near future, the ingredients for a regional crisis with serious global ramifications are clearly present. Just last month, the US National Intelligence Council warned that “climate hazards,” such as “heat waves [and] droughts,” were increasing “social unrest, migration, and interstate tension in countries such as Egypt, Ethiopia, Iraq, and Jordan.”

If we translate those sparse words into a future scenario, sometime before 2040 when average global warming is likely to reach that dangerous 1.5 degrees Celsius mark, the Middle East will likely experience a disastrous temperature rise of 2.3 degrees. Such intense heat will produce protracted droughts far worse than the one that destroyed those Bronze Age civilizations, potentially devastating agriculture and sparking water wars among the nations that share the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, while sending yet more millions of refugees fleeing toward Europe. Under such unprecedented pressure, far-right parties might take power across the continent and the EU could rupture as every nation seals its borders. NATO, suffering a “severe crisis” since the Trump years, might simply implode, creating a strategic vacuum that finally allows Russia to seize Ukraine and the Baltic states.

As tensions rise on both sides of the Atlantic, the UN could be paralyzed by a great-power deadlock in the Security Council as well as growing recriminations over the role of its High Commissioner for Refugees. Pummeled by these and similar crises from other climate-change hot spots, the international cooperation that lay at the heart of Washington’s world order for the past 90 years would simply wither, leaving a legacy even less visible than that block of the Berlin Wall in midtown Manhattan.

BEIJING’S EMERGING WORLD SYSTEM
As Washington’s global power fades and its world order weakens, Beijing is working to build a successor system in its own image that would be strikingly different from the present one.

Most fundamentally, China has subordinated human rights to an overarching vision of expanding state sovereignty, vehemently rejecting foreign criticism of its treatment of its Tibetan and Uighur minorities, just as it ignores equally egregious domestic transgressions by countries like North Korea and the Philippines. If climate change does, in fact, spark mass migrations, then China’s untrammeled nationalism, with its implicit hostility to the rights of refugees, might prove more acceptable to a future era than Washington’s dream of international cooperation that has already begun to sink from sight in the era of Donald Trump’s “great wall.”

In a distinctly ironic twist, a rising China has defied the long-standing doctrine of open seas, now sanctioned under a UN convention, instead effectively reviving themare clausumversion of imperial power by claiming adjacent oceans as its sovereign territory. When the Permanent Court of Arbitration, the original world court, unanimously rejected its claim to the South China Sea in 2016, Beijing insisted that the ruling was “naturally null and void” and would not affect its “territorial sovereignty” over an entire sea. Not only did Beijing in that way extend its sovereignty over the open seas, but it also signaled its disdain for the international rule of law, an essential ingredient in Washington’s world order.

More broadly, Beijing is building an alternative international system quite separate from established institutions. As a counterpoise to NATO on Eurasia’s western extremity, China founded the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in 2001, a security and economic bloc weighted toward the eastern end of Eurasia thanks to the membership of nations like Russia, India, and Pakistan. As a counterpoint to the World Bank, Beijing formed the Asian Infrastructure Development Bank in 2016 that quickly attracted 70 member nations and was capitalized to the tune of $100 billion, nearly half the size of the World Bank itself. Above all, China’s $1.3 trillion Belt and Road Initiative, 10 times the size of the US Marshall Plan that rebuilt a ravaged Europe after World War II, is now attempting to mobilize up to $8 trillion more in matching funds for 1,700 projects that could, within a decade, knit 76 nations across Africa and Eurasia, a full half of all humanity, into an integrated commercial infrastructure.

By shedding current ideals of human rights and the rule of law, such a future world order would likely be governed by the raw realpolitik of commercial advantage and national self-interest. Just as Beijing effectively revived the 1455 doctrine of mare clausum, so its diplomacy will be infused with the self-aggrandizing spirit of the 1885 Berlin conference that once partitioned Africa. China’s communist ideals might promise human progress, but in one of history’s unsettling ironies, Beijing’s emerging world order seems more likely to bend that “arc of the moral universe” backward.

Of course, on a planet on which by 2100 that country’s agricultural heartland, the north China plain with its 400 million inhabitants, could become uninhabitable thanks to unendurable heat waves and its major coastal commercial city, Shanghai, could be under water (as could other key coastal cities), who knows what the next world order might truly be like. Climate change, if not brought under some kind of control, threatens to create a new and eternally cataclysmic planet on which the very word “order” may lose its traditional meaning.


Jan A. Zalasiewicz
Professor, Paleobiology, University of Leicester

It depends on what world we’re talking about.

The Earth’s a big ball of rock, and it will be here for the next five billion years, until the sun becomes a red giant and in effect blows it up. But it’s a little like Dante’s circles of hell: there are different steps. One world finishes, and an unfamiliar one starts.

The Anthropocene, the proposed new epoch of geological time when humans have come to dominate many processes on our planet’s surface, is based on the end of a particular world, the Holocene world that has been familiar, supportive, comfortable and more or less predictable for basically all of human civilization, up until the 20th century. You could have all kinds of upheavals and scorched-earth wars, but you could always count on nature growing back, on people picking themselves up and starting again on a healing Earth.

With the end of Holocene conditions, much of the familiar world we took for granted is now changing. Climate is clearly changing—we’ve got a trillion tons of extra carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, the Earth is measurably warming, ice is measurably melting, there is beginning to be more sea and less land. And then there are the changes we’re making to the biosphere, largely by replacing more or less natural habitats—forests, savannas, etc.—with urban areas and farmland. We’ve changed the biological landscape around us. Both of these changes are ongoing, effectively permanent, and they’re almost certainly going to intensify before they stabilize again. And that is how the Anthropocene may be viewed, as the end of one world and the beginning of another one. We’re pushing ourselves and the other living organisms with which we share the planet into the unknown.

I used to think this would not affect us in our lifetimes—that it was really going to start being a problem for our children and grandchildren, and that my generation would see things out in more or less familiar conditions. But look at the things like the shrinking of arctic ice, and changing climate patterns, including rising temperatures, as we continue to add another ~20 billion tons of heat-trapping carbon dioxide into the atmosphere each year. Global warming is kicking in already and, yes, I suspect these changes will become really quite noticeable over coming decades. Factor in the unknowns of how society will respond, how the biosphere will react, and how the rapidly growing ‘technosphere’ will evolve, and we may well be in for quite dramatic, and quite challenging times. The new world of the Anthropocene is taking shape rather more quickly than I or many of my colleagues would have thought ten or twenty years ago.

“It’s a little like Dante’s circles of hell: there are different steps.”
Timothy Morton
Professor of English at Rice University and the author of Being Ecological and Dark Ecology: For a Future of Coexistence, among other books

The very question indicates that the world has already ended. Feelings of unreality or uncertainty are symptoms of trauma. When you’re in a car crash, you wonder whether it’s really happening… The pain of all kinds comes later. “Has global warming really started yet?” is a sign that it has already started, a bit like “I wonder when this acid is really going to kick in.”

“World” just refers to all the stuff you’re into. You are not spatially (“extensionally” as we like to say) “in” a world; you are “into” stuff, and that’s your world(s). The concept implies a reliable background that just churns away as you do your thing. Doesn’t have to be “nature” in particular.

But in ecological terms, the biosphere is no longer reliable. You can’t forget about it. Hurricanes happen in weird scary ways and the mediterranean belt of Earth is bursting into flame. And… we know that there’s no “away.” When you flush the toilet, you know where it goes—into the waste water treatment plant, the ocean or whatever… where it doesn’t go is this magical place called “away.” We now have planetary awareness, whether we like it or not—it’s one of the reasons why there are fascist movements all over Earth... So many extreme right movements in the USA can be traced back to opposition to “Agenda 21” of the United Nations Earth Summit (Rio, 1991), linking antisemitic fantasies about “globalism” with language about biodiversity and international cooperation.

But worlds always have holes in them, because they work for someone, not everyone. Your nice smoothly functioning world is their refugee internment camp.

The world has already ended. You are already dead. This is the afterlife, a.k.a. the beginning of real history when humans finally get to collaborate on a more equal basis with nonhumans.

Your intuition is correct: this is a nightmare. Isn’t that a relief and a fantastic challenge?

“The world has already ended.”
Katharine Hayhoe
Atmospheric scientist and professor of political science at Texas Tech University, where she is director of the Climate Science Center

The question exemplifies why it’s so hard for us to wrap our heads around this problem. We can’t conceive of something as big as the end of civilization as we know it, even as an increasing number of dystopian novels and movies paint graphic visions of what it might look like.

It’s not about the end of the planet. The planet has survived much more extreme conditions than this in the past. It’s about the future of human society, which has evolved over just the last ten thousand years or so, during a very narrow range of climate variability.

And just like the proverbial frog—or lobster—in the boiling pot, it’s likely that we may not even realize when we’ve reached points of no return until it is too late.

That’s why I do the work I do, exploring the impacts of a broad range of future scenarios, quantifying what the impact of a two, three, or four degree warming would be on our drought risk, our energy demand, our water supply, and more. Only by understanding the risks we face can we hope to avoid them.

Michael Mann
Distinguished Professor of Atmospheric Science and Director of the Earth System Science Center at Penn State

I imagine we will know the world (by which I mean, a world that can support a human civilization of 7 billion+ people) ended the same way the inhabitants of Easter Island knew they had ended their world. In their case, it was when they cut down the last tree. In our case, it will be when we lose the last mountain glacier, the last major coral reef, the last vestige of summer sea ice in the Arctic, the last low-lying Pacific island nation, and so on. These dominoes will fall one after the other if we continue with our profligate burning of fossil fuels. The choice is ours. We can still avoid this future if we accelerate the transition already underway from fossil fuels toward renewable energy. That requires action from our policymakers and pressure from all of us on them to act in our behalf rather than on behalf of polluting interests.

Recent Videos from GizmodoVIEW MORE >
GoPro Better Watch Its Back
6/04/19 10:50AM
“We can still avoid this future.”
Seth Baum
Co-Founder and Executive Director of the Global Catastrophic Risk Institute and a Research Affiliate of the University of Cambridge Centre for the Study of Existential Risk

For most global catastrophe scenarios, it ain’t over ‘till it’s over. As long as some humans are still alive, we’ve got a chance to live on and even rebuild civilization. That goes for even the most extreme nuclear wars, pandemics, climate change, volcano eruptions, asteroid impacts, etc. In a few scenarios, humans have no chance of survival, such as some scenarios of runaway AI, alien invasion, and cosmic explosions. However, for these scenarios, we either wouldn’t know in advance that the catastrophe is coming, or we wouldn’t know that everyone would die.

In practical terms, this means that we must be proactive to prevent global catastrophes, because we can’t count on reliable warning signs, and we should also be prepared to survive and recover from any global catastrophes that do occur.

Steven Petsch
Associate Professor, Department of Geosciences at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, whose research involves global-scale carbon cycling and controls on the composition of Earth’s atmosphere over geologic time.

The literal answer to this question from my perspective as a geologist is—the world is not going to end, at least not for many hundreds of millions of years. But if the question is a more human-centered one – “How will we know when Planet Earth has changed enough to affect the natural world as we know it, and by extension our human systems and societies that rely on that natural world?” – that becomes something more real and less academic.

For me, the sign that we’ve lost ‘the world as we knew it’ will be when one of a handful of climate tipping points are crossed. The soonest of these will be the loss of sea ice from the Arctic Ocean during summertime. Throughout human history, the Arctic has been defined as a permanently ice-covered ocean, but the extent of that ice is declining dramatically. For each of the past few years, summertime ice only occupied about 50% of the area it did 30 years ago. It’s not hard to extrapolate from this and predict that in a few decades the Arctic Ocean will be ice-free in summer.

Another soon-to-be tipping point that will show we’ve lost the world as we know it is the loss of coral reefs due to warming and declining pH in surface waters of tropical oceans. These reefs that are so familiar to us as tourist locations, biodiversity hotspots and important fisheries will be a thing of the past, with living reefs replaced by dead coral skeletons devoid of fish. This may happen as soon as mid-century. Small patchy reefs will survive but the massive barrier and fringing reefs that define so many tropical coastlines will be gone.

Unfortunately, these events seem nearly inevitable and without concerted, global-scale action, others will follow. Our human impact on the carbon cycle took decades to set into motion, and it cannot quickly be pushed from its current path. It will take massive wholesale changes in our energy and food production systems to halt or even slow these global changes. In this way, regardless of whether it is tipping points in our natural world or the actions we will to take to mitigate and adapt to climate change, the world as we thought we knew it is over.

Remember when the possibility of nuclear war seemed remote? The fact that it doesn’t anymore shows how quickly threats to humanity can change and how important they are to pay attention to.

The Global Challenges Foundation, which works to reduce the global problems that threaten humanity, compiles an annual report on global catastrophic risks. The group released the 2018 edition in September, and the litany is harrowing: Chemical warfare, supervolcanic eruptions, asteroid collisions, and the looming effects of climate change threaten to cause everything from civilizational collapse to human extinction.

Some of these risks sound like science fiction, but so did weapons of mass destruction and climate change 100 years ago. As Allan Dafoe and Anders Sandberg of the Future of Humanity Institute write, our brains aren’t good at thinking about catastrophic risk because they either “completely neglect or massively overweight” things that are low probability. So the report, overseen by a team at GCF but with each section written by leading experts, combines historical evidence and scientific data to determine the biggest threats.

The good news for us is that scientists think the world will be habitable for at least a few hundred million more years. The bad news is there’s a lot that could change that. The risk of the threats highlighted in the report actually causing mass casualties are still small, but that doesn’t mean they’re not important to pay attention to — especially when the worst-case scenario means human extinction.

Here’s what should be keeping you up at night and what, realistically, might cause humans to go the way of dinosaurs.

1) Nuclear war
A nuclear detonation from one of today’s more powerful weapons would cause a fatality rate of 80 to 95 percent in the blast zone stretching out to a radius of 4 kilometers — although “severe damage” could reach six times as far.

But it isn’t just the immediate deaths we need to worry about — it’s the nuclear winter. This is when the clouds of dust and smoke released shroud the planet and block out the sun, causing temperatures to drop, possibly for years. If 4,000 nuclear weapons were detonated — a possibility in the event of all-out nuclear war between the US and Russia, which hold the vast majority of the world’s stockpile — an untold number of people would be killed, and temperatures could drop by 8 degrees Celsius over four to five years. Humans wouldn’t be able to grow food; chaos and violence would ensue.

A big worry here is the arsenal of nukes. While numbers have fallen over several decades, the United States and Russia have just under 7,000 warheads each, the largest collections in the world. The UK, France, China, India, Pakistan, North Korea, and Israel all have nuclear weapons.

Hundreds of nuclear weapons are ready to be released within minutes, a troubling fact considering that the biggest threat of nuclear war may be an accident or miscommunication. A few times since the 1960s, Russian officers (and, in 1995, the president) narrowly decided not to launch a nuclear weapon in response to what they’d later find out were false alarms.

2) Biological and chemical warfare
Unlike nuclear weapons, which require complex engineering, biological and chemical warfare can be developed at a relatively low cost and with relatively attainable materials.

In the past few years, the Syrian government has used chemical weapons in the civil war that has ravaged the country. These chemical attacks using sarin and chlorine have appalled the international community, and underscored the damage chemical weapons can do. Weaponized toxic chemicals could do tremendous harm to a localized target — say, if the toxins were released into the air or into the water supply.

Biological weapons represent a greater catastrophic threat. Advances in synthetic biology have made very real the possibility of malicious actors creating harmful pathogens for weaponization — or innocent researchers accidentally releasing a lethal infectious bug out into the world. In the event of a fast-moving pandemic, the world would be pretty vulnerable.

3) Catastrophic climate change
A United Nations panel of scientists released a report last week saying that we only have 12 years to keep global warming to moderate levels.

Projections of the effects of climate change vary depending on how much the Earth warms (usually modeled on an increase of 1 to 3 degree Celsius). None of the scenarios look good.

At best, we’re looking at more frequent and severe tropical cyclones. Midrange predictions include the loss of the majority of global agricultural land and freshwater sources, with major coastal cities like New York and Mumbai ending up underwater. At worst, human civilization would come to an end.

Even if current global commitments to reduce carbon emissions are kept, there is a one-third chance of the Earth’s temperature increasing by 3°C, which would cause most of Florida and Bangladesh to drown.

Catastrophic climate change is also not something we’re dedicating nearly enough attention to. The author of this section in the report, Dr. Leena Srivastava, the acting director of general at the Energy and Resources Institute, points out that we’ve put enough time and resources into airplane safety that only 27 planes crash a year. But “if dying in a flight accident was as likely as a 3°C global temperature increase, then the number of people dying in airplanes every year would be 15 [million].”

4) Ecological collapse
 Salton Sea Plan Calls For 200,000 Homes On Former Atomic Weapons Site
A tree killed by rising saltwater is seen beyond a mud flat at dawn on the east shore of the Salton Sea on October 22, 2005. across the lake from Salton City, California. David McNew/Getty Images
Ecosystems are the delicate community of living organisms, like humans and animals, interacting with their nonliving environment, like air and water. Ecosystems can recover from a certain amount of impact from humans, like temperature increases or habitat loss, but there’s a tipping point at which they can’t — and according to the report, we might be reaching that tipping point.

Lake Chad in West Africa is an example of ecological collapse. Sixty years of drought, overuse of water, and the impacts of climate change have reduced the lake by 90 percent. Its massive reduction has adversely affected the livelihoods of more than 40 million people in Chad, Nigeria, Niger, and Cameroon that depend on it.

Scholars believe this moment in history constitutes a new geological era, called the Anthropocene. In this new era, humans are the primary change agents, rapidly degrading what makes the planet habitable, intensifying greenhouse gas concentration, and damaging the health of marine ecosystems.

5) Pandemics
Twice in modern history, plagues have swept across the world, killing an estimated 15 percent of the population in a few decades. They occurred way back in the fifth and 14th centuries, respectively — but there is a serious risk that a new infectious disease could cause another outbreak, especially with today’s urban and mobile global population.

Luckily, deadly diseases with the capacity to spread globally are rare. But they do happen — a century ago, the Spanish flu killed more than 50 million people. Outbreaks of SARS and Ebola in recent years also ring alarm bells.

Antibiotics, our greatest defense against disease, are becoming less effective as some strains of bacteria become resistant to them. Antibiotic-resistant bacteria are responsible for an estimated 700,000 annual deaths. If we don’t develop new advances against antibiotic resistance, that number is estimated to reach 10 million by 2050.

6) Asteroid impact
Asteroids are rocks that revolve around the sun and that occasionally collide with the Earth. An asteroid large enough to cause a global catastrophe hits Earth every 120,000 years, scientists estimate. It’s likely what killed the dinosaurs, and if an asteroid even one-tenth the size of the one that caused their extinction hit Earth today, the results would be devastating. Scientists estimate it could release enough particles to block the sun for months and cause a famine killing hundreds of millions.

NASA announced in 2011 that it had mapped more than 90 percent of objects in space larger than 1 kilometer in diameter, and that none of them are likely to hit Earth. But there’s still a lot we don’t know about smaller objects that, while unlikely to cause a global catastrophe, could have a big enough local impact to disrupt social and economic systems.

7) Supervolcanic eruption
 Hawaii’s Kilauea Volcano Erupts Forcing Evacuations
Onlookers and media gather as lava from a Kilauea volcano fissure erupts in Leilani Estates, on Hawaii’s Big Island, on May 26, 2018. Mario Tama/Getty Images
A supervolcanic explosion 74,000 years ago ejected so much debris into the atmosphere that scientists believe it caused the Earth to cool by several degrees Celsius. Some experts believe this caused the greatest mass plant and animal extinction in human history, bringing the species to the brink of extinction.

How likely is that to happen today? It’s hard to say since we don’t have much to compare it to, but data suggests a supervolcanic eruption occurs on average every 17,000 years. If that’s true, then we’re overdue — the last one we know of was 26,500 years ago in New Zealand.

We don’t have a way to anticipate eruptions more than a few weeks or months in advance, and we don’t really have any way to reduce the likelihood of eruption right now, but scientists are monitoring several areas of risk, including Yellowstone in the US.

8) Solar geoengineering
There’s a dramatic option for stopping, or even reversing, rising global temperatures, but it comes with significant possible risk.

Solar geoengineering would reflect light and heat away from Earth and back into space by injecting aerosols into the stratosphere, the second layer of Earth’s atmosphere. For now, it only exists in computer models, but the first experiment is being planned by Harvard researchers.

Solar geoengineering is one of two emerging technologies that could manipulate the atmosphere and reduce climate risk. The other is directly removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, which doesn’t currently exist on a big enough scale.

If solar geoengineering were deployed, it would affect the entire atmosphere and be humanity’s largest-ever global endeavor. While it is the only known technique that could stop rising temperatures, there’s still a lot we don’t know, including whether it could destabilize local and global climate or ecosystems. Manipulation on this scale without understanding the effects could turn out to be catastrophic for the human race. The technology could also be cheap enough (as low as $10 billion a year) that it could be wielded by one country or a wealthy individual, introducing the possibility of reckless use.

9) Artificial intelligence
Artificial intelligence (AI) is progressing rapidly. Surveyed scientists estimate, on average, that there is a 50 percent chance of AI being able to perform most tasks as well as, or better than, humans by 2050, with at least a 5 percent chance of surpassing human intelligence a couple of years after that.

There’s a common misconception that the risk of AI is that it will become malevolent. The bigger concern is that it will become too good at its job. As the report says: “If you ask an obedient, intelligent car to take you to the airport as fast as possible, it might get you there chased by helicopters and covered in vomit, doing not what you wanted but literally what you asked for.”

The implications become much more frightening when you consider AI weapons in the hands of the wrong person, or an AI arms race leading to an AI war.

10) Unknown risks
It wasn’t that long ago that climate change and nuclear warfare were largely unheard of. Today, they’re risks we’ve already seen the devastating effects of — and that we worry could get much worse. Because of this, there’s a possibility that we haven’t even conceived of what is most likely to kill us.


Let us now gather round the steel drum of fire and remember the moments of our lives before the climate apocalypse. It is perhaps 2045 or 2075, predicting the future is never an exact science, and you and I are among the lucky half billion, or not so lucky, to have survived the collapse of civilization. We avoid wolf packs, ration freeze-dried meals, and reminisce about mundane comforts, like long hot showers and take-out Vietnamese food.

It’s almost difficult to recall the high-volume chatter that had once streamed through our mind’s eye, the news websites and social platforms that had begun to monetize the uptick in climate disaster media, the bundled up packages of commissioned and crowdsourced videos and images of towns made uninhabitable, evacuations captured in real-time courtesy of omnipresent drones. We hashtagged our outrage and dismay. Some of us took out our Amazon credit cards to donate to the most worthy cause or charity, but we had otherwise internalized the agony and drama of global suffering as content, clicking off when bored.

This certainly could have all been avoided. If only the political class of the Western world hadn’t become the plaything of fossil fuel corporations! We are conversant with the basic factual one-two-three on climate change because we feel dutifully obligated to know, and we keep our fingers crossed that we won’t wind up dead in biblical floods or worse as survivors of whatever comes after. We know that our use of fossil fuels emits too much carbon into the atmosphere; it’s heating the world and pushing us ever closer to mass calamity, casualties, pain; the only way to stop it is an enforceable global treaty getting us off of fossil fuels, onto renewables.

In the narrative of our great slide over the cliff’s edge the present moment is notable in that it offers glimmers of quiet hope in the potential of a Green New Deal, with the United States finally leading the way. Concurrent to any social and political movement there’s a rash of topical books hitting the shelves. Every month brings us a new slate of titles informing us in great detail of how exactly civilization will end, or not end, thanks to the ingenious and industrious effort of other people. But let us not forget the truism, born out as always by recent memory, that we should be cynical and suspicious in our current affairs, if only to temper the disappointment that never seems to go away.

***

The two most prominent titles of this year—The Uninhabitable Earth, by David Wallace-Wells, and Losing Earth, by Nathaniel Rich—began as blockbuster magazine articles. A deputy editor at New York Magazine, Wallace-Wells wrote for that publication in 2017 a graphic account of the scope of suffering that unmitigated climate change will soon bring, which per Wallace-Wells is now the most-read story of all time on the magazine’s website. For Rich, a novelist, his article on the missed opportunity in the 1970s and ’80s, when U.S. politicians failed to midwife a global treaty at a key climate change summit, appeared last year in The New York Times Magazine, which gave over an entire issue for the effort. Perhaps with the acute awareness of our imminent demise the authors turned them into books with unusual haste.

In the padding of the original articles with fresh statistics and extended commentaries, both books carry with them a brooding quality, a heavy guilt not so much the authors’ as one that’s projected upon an audience already quite aware of climate change. Indeed, these books are not written to convince those in denial or uncertain of the science. These are for the well-initiated, and in their pairing we have something of a unified view of how we’ve gotten to where we are and where we’re going. Or, if not that, then at least an idea of how our past and future will be successfully packaged and sold to us, the knowing general audience.

In an unusual gambit Rich concedes at the outset to the redundant futility of a detailed narrative on a world altered by climate change. “Nearly every conversation that we have in 2019 about climate change was being held in 1979,” he writes. “We are well-enough acquainted by now with the political story of climate change, the technological story, the economic story, the industry story. They have been told expertly, exhaustively, by journalists and scholars.” To compensate for the climate-soaked reader’s inevitable fatigue Rich deploys a twinkling cinematic plot, a three-act hero tale with an unusual ending.

The hero, in this case, is Jim Hansen, the folksy son of an Iowa waitress and bartender who after a studious youth montage of classroom and graduation scenes found himself in the 1970s at NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies in Manhattan, running computer simulations of our warming planet. According to Hansen’s models, we were on track for a 3-degree-Celsius warming by around 2035, which was a critical threshold for untold global destruction. Although scientists knew man’s fossil fuel habits were dangerously warming the planet as early as the 1930s, for the sake of dramatic tension Rich sets Hansen’s discovery of the approaching 3-degree rise as revelatory. For Hansen, “a guileless atmosphere physicist,” the challenge is to try to “warn humanity of what was coming.”

Hansen is aided in his quest to defeat ignorance by a group of top scientists and science agency officials, a boy’s club called The Jasons. “The Jasons were like one of those teams of superheroes with complementary powers that joins forces in times of galactic crisis,” Rich writes, addressing himself to the audience for Marvel Comics superhero movies. Together, The Jasons and Hansen seek to convince Washington that we are doomed. Through a series of conference room meetings with slide projectors, meetings in backroom offices, and meetings before congressional subcommittees, Rich shows Hansen and his squad of scientists quibbling over report language and how best to communicate the stakes of their findings to a political body that would only take “decisive action … during a crisis.”

Rich keeps reminding the reader of his story template, writing that while “Hansen could occupy the role of hero,” there were worthy foes to oppose him. “A villain was emerging too: Fred Koomanoff, Reagan’s new director of the Energy Department’s carbon dioxide program, a wolf asked to oversee the henhouse.” Koomanoff and other administration figures hostile to the factual claims of the science community do what they can to undercut Hansen, chopping at his NASA funding and spinning his congressional testimony. But Hansen’s warnings, widely covered in the media, garner support from the public as well as both sides of Congress. Then-presidential candidate George H.W. Bush seizes on the groundswell of publicity around climate change during his campaign, and vows to enact regulations on carbon emission once in office.

Once elected, however, Bush is at best uninterested in environmental policy, and his chief of staff, John Sununu, takes up the job of super villain, doing whatever he can to blunt Hansen and his widening coalition seeking a global agreement on carbon regulation. The climatic showdown between Hansen and Bush’s administration takes place at a 1989 diplomatic summit in the Netherlands, where representatives of 65 countries have come together to sign a binding treaty to reduce carbon emissions by 20 percent before 2005. In the end, Hansen and the others lose out to the White House, which had roused Russia, other Soviet republics, and Great Britain to join them in endorsing a toothless treaty with no enforceable limits.

The point Rich wishes to make with the book is that in 1989 there was never a better time for political action on climate change. The public was in favor of emissions regulation. Politicians from both sides knew it was prudent. And even fossil fuel corporations had resigned themselves to the inevitable fate of regulation. So what happened? Despite their public statements of support, the political establishment didn’t think the long-term stability gained by curbing emissions was worth the painful cost of short-term changes to a society built on fossil fuels.

Since then, there have been similar diplomatic summits, the Paris Accord included, but the agreements have been weak at best, while carbon emissions continue to climb. As Rich notes, since the 1989 gathering in the Netherlands, “more carbon has been released into the atmosphere … than in the entire history of civilization preceding it.” Like Bush on the presidential campaign trail in the ’80s, nations have recently taken up the mantle as world leaders in climate change action, Canada, Denmark, and Australia included, but they continually fail “to honor their commitments.” Because, even when there are agreements made, Rich points out, they’re inherently flawed by the lack of enforcement. ‘There is no global police force, and no appetite for economic sanctions or military action triggered by a failure to meet emissions.”


A strong wind blows embers around a resident hosing his burning property during the Creek Fire on Dec. 5, 2017, in Sunland, California. (Photo: David McNew/Getty Imagess)
Rich’s ultimate solution to the broken political system is a peculiar one. As “we face the prospect of civilizational death,” he writes, “it brings into relief a dimension of the crisis that to this point has been largely absent: the moral dimension, which is to say, the heart of the matter.” But for Rich the moral responsibility doesn’t fall squarely upon the political class elected to serve and protect its constituents. Rather, the moral failure is found among us, the constituents. ‘“Nobody who lives on the electrical grid can be let entirely off the hook; certainly not any American,” Rich says. From the “moderator of a presidential debate” who doesn’t ask candidates hard enough climate change questions to the magazine “editor who fails to assign” enough climate change articles—everyone is complicit. Even the destitute among us are villains, as “a homeless person in the U.S. today consumes twice as much energy as the average global citizen.”

Elevating the issue of climate change above simple party politics or fossil fuel greed and into the rarefied moral strata follows Rich’s fetishization of the hero storybook model. “We can call the villains villains, the heroes heroes, the victims victims, and ourselves complicit,” he writes, endeavoring to pen a suprahero narrative whereby you and I, the morally bankrupt citizens, can rise above our own inherent flaws and help create a society that is more morally pure.

“A human problem requires a human solution,” Rich says with chilling, ominous undertones. “One of the most effective weapons is mortal shame. Shame may have no influence on the handyman of industry, but an appeal to higher decency can work on the human beings who vote in elections.”

Once society no longer tolerates those weak enough to still desire fossil fuels, then the political and industrial class will have to follow. Otherwise, pragmatic appeals to those who control the power and money will be meaningless.

***

Like Rich, David Wallace-Wells wants to cut through the deadlock on climate change with a direct appeal to the human condition. However, rather than run the risk of promoting an elite moral class that bestows upon itself the privilege of shaming others, Wallace-Wells seeks to rouse us into action by making us afraid. Very afraid. Because as he opens the book: “It is worse. Much worse than you think.”

“The mass extinction we are now living through has only just begun; so much more dying is coming,” Wallace-Wells writes of our shared future, for we are “a civilization enclosing itself in a gaseous suicide, a running car in a sealed garage.” Over 12 snappy sections Wallace-Wells documents in horrendous, suffocating detail the biblical events of death and decay that await us right around the corner. We’re stepping onto an entirely new planet, one ravaged by fires, floods, tsunamis, droughts, famines, and temperatures so hot that “humans at the equator and in the tropics would not be able to move around outside without dying.”

Perhaps because Wallace-Wells is the bearer of such bad news, he connects with us as a complicit bad actor. “I toss out tons of wasted food and hardly ever recycle,” he confesses. “I leave my air-conditioning on.” For those fastidious eco-lads and green ladies of the Western world, Wallace-Wells points out that all their effort to save the Earth one person at a time doesn’t really matter. In the grand scheme of carbon emissions, “the climate calculus is such that individual lifestyle choices do not add up to much.”

It doesn’t matter how we change our day-to-day bad habits, Wallace-Wells assures us. We are all together hurtling toward a world of “suffering beyond anything that humans have ever experienced through many millennia.” The ominous tone and details of our pain is his operating principal. “If this strikes you as tragic, which it should, consider that we have all the tools we need, today, to stop it all,” Wallace-Wells writes, noting that currently available technology combined with proper emissions regulation and a shift to greener production of food and energy can save civilization from collapse.

Similar to Rich’s shaming of the commonwealth, Wallace-Wells hopes that a critical mass can be terrified into mass action, engendering “a renewed egalitarian energy” that uses “technology to chase every last glimmer of hope for averting disastrous climate change.” In this way, Wallace-Wells mimics Rich’s suprahuman hero tale; he just sees fear to be more effective than shame to rouse the citizenry, in order to achieve a more elevated state of being. “We have an idiomatic name for those who hold the fate of the world in their hands, as we do: gods.”

The temptation to confront the realities of climate change by venerating those engaged with the confrontation is one that has been indulged by climate change observers for quite some time, going back to Bill McKibben, a former New Yorker staff writer, whose 1989 The End of Nature is an obvious touchstone for both Rich and Wallace-Wells. In his book, McKibben evokes the post-nature capacities of modern man as an all-powerful being that must no longer use its powers for evil. “We are in charge now, like it or not. As a species we are as gods—our reach global,” he writes.

With a nod to McKibben’s idolization of the progressives who posit themselves capable of correcting an ill society, Wallace-Walls concludes that if “humans are responsible for the problem, they must be capable of undoing it.” But the path Wallace-Wells sees to successful implementation of the proper technologies and regulations is a familiar one: “voting and organizing and political activity deployed at every level.”

Yet, if we are already fully capable of fixing the problem with the tools at hand, and our political system is in fact equipped to enact the changes once they’re demanded by the majority of the voting public, one might fairly question whether shame and fear are the best or even the only methods to catalyze us into action. To put it another way, perhaps the hero tales are themselves nothing more than distractions, useless provocations of a readership that already knows what’s at stake—a knowledge that will be slower to convert into meaningful action if it is driven by fear of what might come and shame of what we are already. Tormented by author-induced fear and shame, it wouldn’t be surprising if guilty readers chose to have another hamburger.

Skip to content
School Of Squirt
VIDEO LESSONS
 
ABOUT US
 
BLOG
 
LOGIN
 
7 Steps to Eat Her Pussy Out – For Max Pleasure
Laura Halliday
82 Comments
Last Updated June 21, 2019
Lessons
Share on facebook
FACEBOOK
Share on google
GOOGLE+
Share on twitter
TWITTER
Giving the woman you love the true sexual pleasure that she CRAVES is NOT easy…

But in this article and our training videos which will be available after, I’ll show you exactly how you can make it not only EASY, but effortless

Contrary to what most people think, women think about sex more than men (they’re just better at hiding it.)

Women dream about a guy who can give them a heart-pounding, body-shaking orgasm.

Women dream about a guy who knows exactly how to eat her pussy out… the right way!

Women are obsessed about sex and are constantly looking for a guy who knows how to eat her out until has one dripping orgasm after the other.

So my advice is to make sure you are that guy so she doesn’t look anywhere else.

Because when you do it right, you’ll get messages like this the next day:



Do you want to give her an orgasm that ‘runs up her spine’ and makes her ‘toes curl up’ just thinking about it?

Then read this article from start to finish.

The truth is, if you don’t know about these techniques then you risk losing your woman to a guy who does know them…

(I found this out that hard way as you’ll learn when you watch this video)

I’m going to show you how to eat a girl so that you almost guarantee she has an orgasm.

I’m going to show you how to use your tongue to make a woman addicted to your touch.

Eating pussy is an art form – and it’s something every guy should learn how to do or he risks his girl leaving him for a guy who knows better.

Most guys don’t take the time to study female sexual pleasure – and that’s why we (Axel & Laura) created School Of Squirt.

Although in this article I’m going to give you some great tips on how to go down on her for maximum orgasms in minimum time….

My best techniques have been put into our amazing course – Squirting Triggers Training Course  – which will teach you everything you need to know about true female sexual pleasure.

It’s not just about making her squirt…

Inside the course you’ll learn everything you need to know about female orgasms.

And our training videos, in lesson 4 will show you how to make her have an explosive squirting orgasm while you eat her pussy out.

So be careful – she will probably squirt her juices all over your face.

If you love your girlfriend or wife and you want them to feel an overpowering amount of pleasure.

If you want her to tremble with dripping orgasm after dripping orgasm then I highly recommend that you go and check out Squirting Triggers RIGHT NOW.


The Founders – Axel and Laura
The Art Of Foreplay & Arousal
Getinng your woman in the right frame of mind is one of the most crucial aspects of beign able to give her an orgasm.

Wowen are emotional creatures, and its literally impossible to give her an orgasm while she remains in a logical frame of mind (like when she’s just finished work or is stressed out.)

This is why scientists always find it hard to study the female orgasm.

It is your duty and responsibility to get her relaxed, and turn her on so that she forgets about the stresses and worries of life – this is what foreplay is all about.



And unlike men, women take much longer to get in the mood. Maybe you can get an erection and get ready for sex within 10 seconds, for women it could take half an hour or more.

This is when the sexual energy and arousal builds up.

Teasing & Anticipation,
Teasing and foreplay is where the power of the orgasm comes from. Imagine you have a huge bucket at the top of a ladder. The bucket holds water, but first you need to fill up the bucket with water.

Your aim with the bucket is to make the biggest and most dramatic explosion possible when you finally decide to push the bucket of water off the ladder.

You could just put a little bit of water in the bucket and then push it off. But the explosion of water wouldn’t be very big.

You could spend more time filling up the bucket and when you finally pushed the bucket off the ladder the explosion was huge.

The water is like female sexual energy. It needs time and foreplay to build up, but the longer you take to build up her energy, the bigger the orgasm explosion will be at the end. I’ve written a complete guide about how to make a woman wet right here.

Some wise words from Key & Peele – Cunnilingus Class


Using A Blindfold To Increase Anticipation


One of the best ways to increase anticipation and excitiement is to use props.

Because women can also be very self-conscious about sex, and especially about when they get their vagina licked out, a blindfold can be a great way to make her feel less self conscious, and instead just enjoy the sensations.

Using a blindfold on her also has the extra effect of reducing one of her senses. When her sight is switched off her perception of touch will massively increase.

(So she will feel MOORREEE)

She will feel the sensations and stimulation from her pussy so much more.

It’s also slightly scary wearing a blindfold. You will have complete control over her (which women love) and her sense of excitement and anticipation will increase.

Using Handcuffs/Belt/Tie To Make It Exciting
You can take her level of excitement and kink to even another level by handcuffing her to the bed. You can either use prop handcuffs, of for a more spontaneous feel, use your belt or a tie to tie her hands to the bed.

This, in combination with the blindfold and what I’m about to teach you is the beginning of what will be one of the most exciting, powerful, sensual and loving orgasms she will ever have.

No other guy will be able to compare to the orgasm you will give her if you follow these instructions carefully – and for my very best training and our flagship program here at School Of Squirt I recommend checking out Squirting Triggers and learning these techniques for TONIGHT.

The Basics Techniques Of How To Eat Her Pussy Out


There are 5 different ways to stimulate her pussy with your mouth.

Each technique has its own advantages and sensations, so you’ll want to use all methods at different stages or arousal.

You should also study her reactions to she which method she likes the most. Some women have very sensitive vaginas, they prefer the lighter methods.

Some women need a stronger sensation to have an orgasm, so you will need to start with methods 1 and 2 before going on to the rest.

Don’t go straight to her vagina. Start by kissing her body and then work your way down. Tease her. Make every single nerve in her body come alive with sexual tension.

NEW: "Magic Finger Technique" Causes Even The Most 'Non-Orgasmic' Women To Shudder With Pleasure...

Click below to find out...


Blowing
Blowing on her pussy is a great form of arousal, foreplay and teasing. The light, subtle sensation will begin to create sexual energy and tension (which gets released in an orgasm)

The blowing is very light, it teases and tickles her. It draws her attention and focus on to the subtle sensations she feels in her pussy.

This is exactly what you want. You want her in a state of hypersensitivity. Every never in her vagina will start tingling with sensations.

This is setting the stage for the other methods that will eventually tip her over the edge and into a body-trembling orgasm.

Licking


Licking is next. You can now start to use your tongue in light motions across her sensitive parts.

 

It’s important to make your movements light and unpredictable to start with. You still want to tease her. You still want her to be waiting in anticipation (as her sexual energy continues to build.)

Keep her guessing about when and how you will lick her next.

As her level of sexual arousal continues to rise, now you can begin to really start licking her out (and most importantly her clit)

The up and down motion, softly across her clit is usually the best option.

You should vary your strokes. From slow and soft to fast and hard. Always look for her reactions so you can see or hear what she likes best.

Kissing
Kissing her cooch is a great way to show how much you care about her. You shouldn’t kiss her vagina for too long though, but your kissing should be mixed in with the other methods.

Sucking
Sucking is the next stage of pleasure and most women LOVE having their vagina sucked. Now you can start using your whole mouth to stimulate not just her clit, but the rest of her vagina too.

As her arousal levels climb higher and higher she’ll soon be ready for orgasm but you should continue building more and more.

Sucking her pussy

Increase the speed and intensity of the sucking.

Always remember to tease and go two steps forward, one step back. Suck on her female bits for a while, then step back and kiss, lick and blow before carrying on.

Motorboating And Humming 
Motorboating is the final method that you’ll use. It is perhaps the most powerful. Here’s how to do it…

Rest your lips gently around her pussy. Have your lips so they are just lightly touching and then blow out so that your lips vibrate back and forth.

This is called motorboating and sends vibrations down through her pussy. These act like shockwaves that can trigger an orgasm to take place.

Many women claim this is one of their favorite sensations.

You can alter the speed, power and frequency of the vibrations by holding your lips tighter, or blowing harder.

Don’t go crazy though

beeker
Don’t be like this guy and go too fast – Slooow down, be firm yet gentle.
With the motorboating method you’ll want to hold your lips over her clit and the opening to her vagina, although you can move it around and see where provides the best stimulation.

Humming is similar to motorboating but instead of actually letting your lips move your simply rest your mouth against her vagina and hummm softly.

This sends vibrations directly into her pussy that are extremely pleasurable.

For the best results, go back and forth between the methods. Mix it up and keep her guessing.

However, when you feel like she is very close to orgasm, then stick to the method that got her there and don’t change it too much.

Put Your finger In Her Mouth


This is a great little trick that can really drive a woman wild, and can be a great way to learn exactly how your girlfriend or wife likes to have her pussy eaten.

As you continue to eat her out, take your thumb or index finger and slowly insert into her mouth. Tell her that you want her to lick and suck on it exactly how she wants it on her female parts.

As she begins to lick and suck on your finger, copy that motion exactly on to her pussy. She will know what she likes and she will show you.

Copy her motions as she licks, sucks, massages and swirls your finger.

This is a neat trick to learn how your partner likes it. But don’t use it too often. Women like the man to take control, and they like to relax as you do the work.

Put 1 Or 2 Fingers Inside Her
Eating her out with your mouth is one thing, but now you need to add another sensation to the mix.

This will involve inserting a finger or two into her so that you can stimulate her g-spot at the same time as her clit.

As you can imagine, stimulating her g-spot and her clit at the same time will give her twice the amount of pleasure and the ‘simultaneous orgasm’ that will happen as a result is extremely powerful and intense for her.

In Squirting Triggers I’ll show you exactly how to do this the right way.

Insert 1 Or 2 Fingers In Her Bum
Slipping a finger in her puss isn’t the only way you can give her even more pleasure.

You can massage her ass using your fingers – something a lot of women find intensely pleasurable and exciting – and its also possible to give them anal orgasms.

You will need to use lubrication for this though – it is absolutely essential.

I also recommend using a condom. Put your two fingers inside a condom and take a large dollop of lube onto the fingers.

As you continue to eat her out slowly tease her ass. As she relaxs begin inserting your two fingers (with condom on and plenty of lube) slowly into her ass.

Be gentle and slow and make sure she stays relaxed.

Learn more about how to finger a girl here.

The sensation of having her clit stimulated by your tongue – plus the sensation of having her bum massaged with your finger up her bum will be unique, exciting and extremely pleasurable.

Or Use A Butt Plug Instead
plugSome women love this sensation so much, but since you only have two hands you may need to remove your fingers at some point.

In this case you can use a butt plug to give her a similar sensation while you continue to use both your hands in other ways.

This brings me onto my next trick… 

Using A Vibrator To Guarantee Her Orgasms
Using a vibrator can be sneaky trick to give her even more pleasure as the vibrations move through her body almost forcing her to have an orgasm.

However, as guys, most of us don’t have a vibrator, so this is what I recommend and have found to work amazingly well.

Most convenicnece stores sell condoms, but many now also sell lube and vibrating cock rings. Go and grab one of the durex vibrating cock rings (and grab the lube as well.)

You won’t be using the cock ring your self (unless you want to) but the vibrator is the perfect, and discreet toy to rest on the top of your girls pussy.

Durex vibrating cock ringYes that’s right, take the vibrating cock ring (durex make a small, cheap and disposable version which is perfect) and hold it with two fingers.

Please the vibrator gently into the the top of your girl’s pussy, just above the clit.

Do this very slowly at first. Tease her.

She will love it.

Women love a man who takes control and shows experience in the bedroom, so don’t worry about using a vibrator on her.

It will show that your thoughtful and experiences and you know how to please her sexually.

With the vibrator pressed against the top of her vagina, begin eating her out again – follow the instructions before.

Move the vibrator closer to her clit, as you continue to eat her out.

The double sensation of the vibration plus the movement of your tongue on her clit will drive her absolutely wild.

Do this right and she will have orgasm after orgasm – she won’t be able to control herself.

She will beg you for more.

Now, as you rest the vibrator on her clit, and you continue to massage her labia with your mouth, take your other hand.

Using the lube (and a condom if necessary) begin to tickle has bum.

Slowly and gently insert one or two fingers into her bum, as you continue to eat her out and with the vibrator held in place with your other hand.

This is the ultimate stimulation for a women. Some women even find the huge amounts of pleasure unbearable.

Her body will tremble and shake when you do this.

When you lick her out you should also have a feel for her state of arousal.

If you feel like she’s about to have an orgasm, slightly slow down the pace and bring her back from the edge of climax.

Doing this a few times will allow her to get into a higher and higher state of arousal, before she finally climaxes.

And when she finally does cum with your tongue on her clit it will be one of the most intense orgasms she’s ever had.

Making Her Squirt While You Eat Her Pussy
Making her squirt while you eat her pussy can be even more pleasurable. It will be an experience that she never forgets.

Because this is a more advanced technique I’d like to show it to you in detail inside our training course, in Lesson 4 of Squirting Triggers.

Other Positions Than Missionary
There are plenty of positions that you can eat her pussy from.

The most common and one that I have described these techniques from is with her lying on her back with knees bent and you sitting or lying by her legs.


She can use the handcuffs on you next. This is one of my favourite positions to eat out a girl from.
You can also try with her on all fours (doggy position) and eating her out from behind.

If you want to see all of these techniques I’ve just described in vivid action and you want to learn more about giving your girlfriend or wife the most amazing and addictive orgasms of her life then get our video training course – Squirting Triggers TONIGHT.

Oral Choke
A personal favourite of mine is the ‘oral choke’ as we call it.

With her on her back and you eating her out, extend one arm up and lightly grip around her neck.

This is a test to see if she responds positively.

If you get the feeling she likes being choked while you go down on her, you can continue and potentially tighten your grip.

Some women find the sensation of being choked (lovingly) enjoyable. It can be an effective (and novel) way to heighten the sensation of your mouth on her clit.

See diagram below:



Listen to What She’s Not Saying
A woman will very rarely tell you exactly what she wants.

That’s just not sexy for her to have to tell you.

But…

She will give you clues about what she wants most.

This is super important because, at the end of the day, not all women are the same. And they respond differently to different things.

What you’ll want to do it try a few different techniques, and let her body do the speaking for her.

If she moans like crazy when you do one particular movement across her clit – DON’T STOP.

(By the way, go here for our 50 best sex positions!)

If you find the perfect rhythm, keep going at the same pace and don’t change it up.

One of the biggest reasons women give for not being able to orgasm with a guy, is that just before she orgasms she’ll start moaning louder and louder, and this will cause the guy to change his movement or rhythm, which then causes the girl to stop moving towards her climax and preventing her orgasm.

Become a master and listening to what her body is telling you, so she doesn’t have to say a word.

Become good at this, and women will be amazed that you ‘just know what to do.’

You’ll be able to read her like a book. No one else she’s ever been with was able to do that.

Remember to leave a comment if you have a question that you want me to answer or a pussy eating technique or trick that you’d like to share.

You might also like:
Anal Fingering | The Ultimate Guide to Anal Pleasuring

How To Make Love To A Woman

How to Satisfy Her in Bed | The Ultimate Guide

How to Give a Woman a Nipple Orgasm

7 Erotic Massage Secrets | The Ultimate Guide

How To Make A Girl Squirt Effortlessly | 6 Steps To Mega Pleasure

How To Give A Girl An Orgasm And Make Her Cum

What is Dry Humping? | 2019 Guide + Cameron Diaz Video

How To Make A Girl Wet In 7 Steps

How To Squirt: 8 Steps For Amazing Orgasms

The Orgasmic Potential Massage

Female Ejaculation Video Lessons

Female Anatomy Lesson For Squirting

Squirter Dimples 101 | Everything You Need To Know 

What is the Best Lube For Squirting | Ultimate Guide

Now I want to show you a few of our 'Orgasm Secrets' - I created a short video that explains more.

Click below to start watching the new video so you can try using the techniques tonight!


82 thoughts on “7 Steps to Eat Her Pussy Out – For Max Pleasure”

Katherine
October 12, 2015 at 02:34	| Reply
Do you guys do reviews on sex toys?


Laura Halliday
October 12, 2015 at 06:14	| Reply
No we don’t, but thanks for asking


Jim
February 6, 2019 at 15:23	| Reply
I don’t know what I doing wrong because I can’t get my wife to cum like I use to. I have ask her what she likes me to do, but lately she’s just lay there and doesn’t make sounds or cum like she use to and by time I get ready to put my cock in her pussy I go limp. Maybe I waiting too long to get her needs met.


Richard Moore
May 14, 2019 at 07:03	| Reply
Just read this if your waiting so long that your going limp then yes your waiting to long it you need to spark something to get you aroused. Because just because you love someone doesn’t mean that your completely aroused and you also should try other things to respark the sex life


Savita
January 7, 2017 at 15:44	| Reply
Yes i do


Bertrand
October 14, 2015 at 07:52	| Reply
I’m going to try these out tonight – my biggest takeaway – more passion whilst going down on her. If I don’t enjoy then neither will she


james winterfield
December 1, 2015 at 23:49	| Reply
I adore eating the pussy of a beautiful woman and drinking the nectar from her beauty


Martina
December 5, 2015 at 12:56	| Reply
I as a woman found this interesting..but i do love to be spread open and i do love to have my clit sucked …and yes i also love when my guy tells me he wants me to cum in his mouth..my God does that send shivers through me…but yes plz dont rush..long slow movements in the beginning…btw reading this has really got me going ..now my,question is..can every girl squirt..and what exactly is it??


Laura Halliday
December 6, 2015 at 15:30	| Reply
Hey Martina, thanks for your input – long and slow in the beginning is a great tip. Yep, most girls can squirt, some just need more practice (and training than others initially)


samantha
March 9, 2016 at 02:37	| Reply
It is not practice or training on the woman’s end…thanks for putting it on us! The man (or partner) needs to know what he’s doing! There’s a certain angle, pressure and speed that will just make you squirt everywhere, independent of the woman and complete lack of “training”.


ani
May 12, 2016 at 06:51	| Reply
yes- agreed! i squirted with one guy only, and i’ve had more than my fair share of partners. haven’t ever been able to do it with anyone else except for the one partner. he knew how to make me, i try to tell someone to do what he did, but it doesn’t work ;/


Bella
February 18, 2019 at 03:59	| Reply
Yes, every woman could. It is water that is released.


Lee
December 14, 2015 at 19:47	| Reply
wow. I would love for my new bf to read this.. He isn’t terrible but I am certainly not 100% satisfied.. How could I get him to read this or even bring it up without shooting his (Big) ego.. This is something thats very important to me and I’m sure to most women. I try not to compare him to my ex bf, who mastered 85% of your tips.. How did you take it when your gf told you.. did you read up about how?

Thanks


Laura Halliday
December 23, 2015 at 17:27	| Reply
Hi, thanks, yes we definitely need more boyfriends reading SOS hehe. It’s a tough one, for Axel his girlfriend breaking up with him was what lead him to master these skills (he overheard her talking about his lack of prowess in the bedroom.) Try praising him for qualities that don’t exist yet, that sometimes works but it depends on his character. or you could try showing him SOS 🙂


Marv
January 31, 2019 at 19:14	| Reply
Laura with all due respect but most women are also terrible with giving a blowjob.


Firelite
March 20, 2019 at 21:20	| Reply
Lee, I see your dilemma. So I’ll tell you how I stumbled upon this rare gym. Got to keep an open mind and the willingness to experiment. I want to learn how to eat pussy. I have asked the fiance to teach me. This is a fantasy of mine. Him showing me on another girl. He is phenomenal at oral. But, from what I’ve read so far, there is always room for improvement. About to buy the course. Once I’m done, I’ll lead him to the water.


Robin
December 21, 2015 at 21:53	| Reply
My husband loves pleasuring me orally, he even plans for it and whispers in my ear how he wants to do it, he leaves messages taped to my steering wheel, leaves text messages and will leave voice mails throughout the day and gets me wet. I can’t wait to get home because he is very skilled at what he does, he can apply enough pressure to get me off in just seconds or really draw it out so it can last literally hours. He uses props, vibrators at times. He will tie my ankles to hooks in the ceiling and then with my legs in the air he has access to everything and I so much LOVE LOVE LOVE it. I love to have my clitoris sucked even more than intercourse, my husband says my clit gets very swollen and long when I get aroused and he can suck the whole thing in to his mouth and just work me into an altered state of consciousness. I am also multi orgasmic so he uses that to his advantage until I’m too sensitive to have him continue. He tells me that he is giving me a female blowjob because of the size of my clit, I never heard of such a thing, but if it resembles what I do for him with my mouth then I guess I can’t complain. My favorite position is to have him lie on his back, then I kneel over his mouth and hold on to the headboard and then grind against mouth and his tongue just swirls all around my bits until I can’t even kneel anymore, then I roll off and he just continues while I lie on my back. My girlfriends are oh so jealous.


Laura Halliday
December 23, 2015 at 17:19	| Reply
Wow, amazing Robin. You’re definitely a lucky woman and i can imagine that your girlfriends are jealous with your husband having those kind of skills. 🙂


M
January 14, 2016 at 22:34	| Reply
Hi Robin… Nice to hear you have clitoral orgasms, But is your bf also giving you vaginal orgasms through intercourse ????.


Pascual nelson salonga
December 26, 2015 at 07:15	| Reply
I suck the clitoris and played my tounge like a roller coaster to the tip of the clitoris. Continiously. Thats my final touch that meet the sensitivity. After 1st sensitivity. I wait few seconds, i suck it again and just pushing my head away to her pussy like a wild dog begging to stop what im doing.


Juliette
January 25, 2016 at 18:55	| Reply
I want some one to do this for me. Yum!


wyse
March 3, 2016 at 01:46	| Reply
I will love to do it for you over and over again


Anonymous
November 28, 2018 at 10:43	| Reply
Use mine
I’ll do


martin
January 6, 2019 at 01:43	| Reply
i will do it for you beautiful


Chidy
March 10, 2019 at 22:44	| Reply
Come to me bby


AK
February 13, 2016 at 00:02	| Reply
Good article. I’ve been going down on women for a good while and developed similar technique(s); though there’s always something more/good to learn! My “problem” is that my girl mostly turns down the opportunity for a tongue lashing. Tell me, what red-blooded women turns down the opportunity to receive a good old fashioned licking? (besides mine). Must confess, I think about & fantasize going down on someone almost on a daily basis. There has been a few times in the past when I’ve approached some hot thing and asked. Six out of ten times I’ve had good lick….er,,,,luck!


Laura Halliday
February 18, 2016 at 09:31	| Reply
Yes, when you know how to do it right, it’s hard for any woman to say no. The tongue is a great instrument for giving incredible orgasms. Lots of women are insecure about how the look and smell (down there) so helping her overcome these fears is one of the first steps.


Whyte Ikocha
March 14, 2016 at 12:18	| Reply
You are a guru my dear. i did all you thought and suprprise my woman turned round about the bed 360° ×2. I couldnt believe my woman screaming and pouring heavy all over me and i ensured i.didnt waste any juice from her.


marv
January 31, 2019 at 19:21	| Reply
Whyte Yes alex and the woman are indeed guru,s but they dont teach orgasms during intercourse on command for women. energy orgasms during interecourse for both women and men. erotic hypnosis. etc etc, you must study behind Mark Cunningham and David Shade. they are allround sex coaches.


Scott
March 14, 2016 at 22:56	| Reply
Well your Absolutely correct about men not taking the time to learn or to take their time building a woman up to an explosive orgasm. I do all of these things including stopping and taking a short break to kiss my girl. Men have definitely lost the art of foreplay and I make sure that I let a woman knew that she’ll be in for a big surprise when we have sex and just about every woman I have played with and gave the attention that most men don’t do– have told me how incredibly awesome of a lover I am because I do take the time to build her instead of just going right at it. Men you’d better pay attention to what these people and I have said about taking your time and caressing a woman and building her to orgasm because if you don’t–Then people like me will swoop in and do it for you and before long I’ll be having fun with your woman on a regular basis as well as my woman to because she’s Bi


Laura Halliday
March 18, 2016 at 13:04	| Reply
Great point Scott. The guys who learn how to do it right can have his pick of the women. Thanks for contributing


steven
March 19, 2016 at 15:17	| Reply
Great Teacher’s. Can’t wait to try new knowledge on a woman I know that love to squirt


Ryan
April 6, 2016 at 03:53	| Reply
These are some really great tips….I personally have never had a complaint in my method. But, you can always learn something new.

Here is what has always worked for me….it differs slightly from the method you mentioned.

I like to slowly lick and kiss my girls side, right above her hips (just under the rib cage – this causes her to tense up and usually she gets wet from this alone). I then work my way down in between her legs. Instead if getting right to work, try licking and blowing around the out die if her pussy lips (between the thigh and pussy).

After you have teased her like this for a while…you are ready to start paying attention to the pussy itself. Slowly start from the bottom and lick your way up, just missing the clit…in fact go right over the top of it or barely graze it. I then lick the inside of her lips before applying pressure to her pussy with my tounge.

Definitely use the French kissing method mentioned above. That is the best way to describe what happens from there. Let your nose gently rub her clit, but not to often.

Once you sense she is in sexual bliss. Finally take the clit into your mouth and slowly suck it. Then use your tounge and firmly press it back with just the tips of your tounge, twirl it a few times amd repeat the entire process over again (once you have started on the pussy).

I usually end by sucking her clit rather hard while flicking my tounge against her clit or twirling around it rapidly.

She has squirted several times just using this method alone. Not always….besides using these methods, because the one here in this article is definitely a solid foundation….try either talking dirty or tell her how amazing she looks. That will depend on the woman. This will intensify her feelings toward the encounter and helps with getting her to a level where the orgasm is amazing.

I’m in no way trying to disregard your method…just wanted to share my experience as well. Excellent article.


Laura Halliday
April 7, 2016 at 02:45	| Reply
Great tips Ryan, thank you for your method. I’m sure people will find this very useful.


stella
April 21, 2016 at 17:40	| Reply
how is the woman meant to satisfy her guy?


Laura Halliday
May 16, 2016 at 04:27	| Reply
Well that’s another topic entirely 🙂


Susan
May 6, 2016 at 03:46	| Reply
very arousing read, but where’s the anal action? try a few tongue tickles throughout your session. when she’s almost there, still having your tongue on her clit and 2 fingers in her pussy, slide a finger up her ass. it always sends me over the edge. when you do finally fuck her, spend a few minutes gently licking each nipple. she should orgasm at least twice


Michael
May 15, 2016 at 09:22	| Reply
The same for me also


Joel Phelix
May 20, 2016 at 14:47	| Reply
It’s a very nice tip,for how long should the girl feel serouslly f**ked,,,or does depend on the method and vary from girl to girl


Laura Halliday
June 7, 2016 at 17:42	| Reply
All girls are different. There are indicators that you should look out for that show when she is aroused, when she is ready to orgasm, and when she is ready to stop. Learn how to read what her body is telling you and you can’t go wrong.


bharath
June 4, 2016 at 19:54	| Reply
I had sex with my girl but never licked her pussy.. The soon i start kissing & rubbing her her pussy becomes wet & then i dont like that smell & taste. Wat should i do to lick her pussy without smelling & taste.?


Laura Halliday
June 7, 2016 at 17:43	| Reply
We have an article about how to make her pussy smell and taste nice


charlie
June 5, 2016 at 12:36	| Reply
I love how good your steps are on here in a Virgo and I have this women who is willing to teach me the right ways to please a women and is willing to have sex with me. I’m not hung I got a 5″ cock and I’m really nervous about not performing and leaving her not satisfied but we are going to fuck tonight and I’m gonna do your steps on eating pussy and know I’m doing it the right way. She told me that she doesn’t care about size and knows I a Virgo but I just want to surprise her with what I can do in the bedroom. She says she is a freak and trust me I love the sound of that but my two questions are what is the best position to fuck her? The last question is since she loves it freaky and wild what should I do to shock her and would 100% get her off because I want my first time to be awesome and I want to show her how much I want to please her and how good I was having sex for the very first time. Hope you like what I messaged you. Well thank you for giving us all answers to brighten up and improve our sex skills your Awesome. P.S I can’t wait to be squirted on in my face. With her flinching and screaming with pleasure.


Laura Halliday
June 7, 2016 at 17:41	| Reply
Hi Charlie, it sounds like you’re in for a night of fun.
There is no overall best sex position, but generally I would say most women love doggy style. When you lick her out, make sure it’s clear 100% how much you’re enjoying it, this will massively turn her on. Size doesn’t matter too much, it’s much more important to be able to last, and to hit the right spot. For example, her g-spot is on the upper, inside part of her vagina, so with her lying on her back, angle your dick upwards so that it hits the spot more easily, otherwise it will just slide right past it. Hope that helps 🙂


kiran
June 6, 2016 at 07:06	| Reply
Is there any harm.. or any danger.. if we suck her pussy and lick because it will going in mouth


Laura Halliday
June 7, 2016 at 17:37	| Reply
There is a danger if she already has an infection. Although it’s unlikely, with a girl you just met you might want to check. But with a regular partner it should be fine


Supercj
July 11, 2016 at 23:55	| Reply
My frustration isn’t not performing, but she won’t let me finish the job giving her an orgasm with eating pussy. She always pulls me up on top of her before I can get her to have an orgasm. I tell her I want to give her an orgasm while eating her pussy, but she has only let me a few times. Her breathing gets fast and she bites her lip and curls her toes and all that so I know she’s getting close, but that’s when she insists on stopping and having sex. I want to taste her cum, but I can’t unless she actually let’s me give her an orgasm before we have sex.


Laura Halliday
July 16, 2016 at 10:55	| Reply
Hey Super, sounds like you’re doing a good job to start with. Some women can feel isolated when you’re all the way ‘down there’ and she may want to be right next to you when she orgasms. She may feel insecure, of selfish having an orgasm from you eating her out. Maybe next time try teasing her… Get her to the point where she is about to have an orgasm (and she tries to pull you up) then cool her back down again (but stay down eating her) by reducing your speed and intensity. After a while bring her back up to the edge of orgasm, then back down again. This is called stacking! When she finally goes over the edge she won’t have much choice.


Jessica
October 4, 2016 at 22:24	| Reply
Boy this read got me going! I’m addicted to this site. Just wanted to add a personal point: I hate sucking, biting, nibbling, quick tongue flicks and any kind of light or soft touches. It immediately causes me to lose my arousal. I just wanted to say that to let everyone know that every girl is different. I think everything in this post is excellent advice as long as everyone understands its not for everyone.
Signed, a happy squirter!


Octavio
October 14, 2016 at 05:37	| Reply
Very clear and simple, i use to do most techniques explained and totally succesfully. But for a good pussy eating you really must enjoy pussy eating with your five senses and mind too.


Joy
February 14, 2017 at 01:29	| Reply
Hey there, my gf wanted me to eat her pussy and I also want to eat but i tried first time and it smells different and I stopped. I really want to lick her but don’t know if you cam give me suggestion that how would I start then I would be really appreciate it.


MDE427
March 28, 2017 at 14:45	| Reply
Make sure you lick and suck on her clit, and also rub the area just below her clit after its well lubed up. Get your middle finger wet in her pussy for a few minutes and make sure you go in and out, and when going out, bring that wetness down to her ass hole. Get that area nice and wet. Then slowly insert that finger form her pussy into her asshole, all while licking and sucking her clit (hum and vibrate your lips while on her clit). Then take your index finger and insert it into her pussy ….. fuck her pussy and asshole slowly with both fingers in rhythm, while licking and sucking her clit (remember the vibrating with your lips all along), and using your thumb to rub just under her clit, from clit to her pee hole inside her lips. This method will usually take 3 to 5 minutes and she will cum multiple times – fucking massively hard. Afterwards, lay back and enjoy her mouth as she gives you the most appreciative blowjob ever. Even if you tell her you are cumming she will just keep sucking, and she will suck your cum out of your dick into her mouth and swallow.

This is 100% effective. Never let me down. he girl is always so appreciative you gave her such a massive orgasm that she wants to return the favor and give you one ……. she is fine with swallowing your cum at t his point. Your dick will thank you!!


Laura Halliday
April 5, 2017 at 20:14	| Reply
Great tips, thanks


MissyNikkii
April 14, 2017 at 01:22	| Reply
I just got married today and my husband is a freak who just knows how to eat me out.. He does exactly as the article, just that he wants to continuously eat my pussy instead of fucking me. I don’t mind him doing it because I give excellent blowjobs but he just knows how to eat me.

He came home today all happy after the wedding, when we decided to have a little party, just me and him. We started off with a dance with slow music, candles around us, a bottle of champagne and kisses. We eventually ended up on our bed naked and him at my pussy. I tried warding him off but he just kept me feeling like I was about to cum. He teased my pussy for about 1 hour even though I was having orgasms. He truly has a great tongue and knows how to get a woman turned on.

This article has been truely great and arousing to me as I know what a man can do when he wants you vulnerable..

Thank you for showing me these amazing techniques!

Signed- Just got married to my amazing husband Showen


Laura Halliday
May 19, 2017 at 06:42	| Reply
Hi Nikkii, that’s great to hear that your husband loves to eat your pussy. You’re a lucky lady. It’s a rare thing that a man knows what he is doing down there, so many men have absolutely no idea what to do.


Megan
May 9, 2017 at 03:18	| Reply
Don’t forget to have sex with her shortly after eating her out! Penetration after great head is a combination made for squirting 🙂


Laura Halliday
May 19, 2017 at 06:35	| Reply
Thanks for the recommendation Megan.


Rick
May 22, 2017 at 17:30	| Reply
You want him To do better. Be honest
As a guy yes it hurt my pride when my wife finally told me I suck at eating her out.
And talked about it. Be sure not to ever mention anything about past lovers he already know thats how you know what you like. He don’t want to here about that.it will just cause a fight. So just stick to I like this or that. Look stuff up together watch pussy eating porn together and show him see how they do that I like that.
When she told me I sucked it hurt yes but it also made me want to learn her body. I’m now much better and still learning new stuff all the time.


Laura Halliday
June 4, 2017 at 03:37	| Reply
Thanks Rick. Good on you for taking the time and effort to learn about how to please her. I couldn’t think of a better way to spend your time. Also, good idea to watch something erotic together.


Mustafa
June 13, 2017 at 08:43	| Reply
Very awesome topic


betty
August 2, 2017 at 03:40	| Reply
I am 92 as of last Monday. I have several men from the nearby golf course that take turns licking me after 18 holes. The best of them thrusts his tongue like a sherman canon into my vagina at least 100 times before he often needs a nap. When he wakes, we have tea and he licks my clitoris until I squirt.


Laura Halliday
August 10, 2017 at 18:33	| Reply
Thanks for the comment Betty – good to hear you and your friends are still going strong and loving your sex life.


Caroline
September 16, 2017 at 15:47	| Reply
My god I want my pussy eaten right now I am so turned on!


Laura Halliday
September 18, 2017 at 07:39	| Reply
Love this comment Caroline – thanks 🙂


Jim
February 1, 2018 at 15:31	| Reply
I would love to lick pussy and I wish I could make any ladies cum all over my face


Ebenezer
November 19, 2017 at 08:19	| Reply
Hi I’m Ebenezer from west africa – ghana , I honestly love eating ma woman pussy at all times, and I feel much better when I taste her cum in ma mouth. thanks a lot for this topics.


Jim
February 1, 2018 at 15:24	| Reply
I would love some advice on how to get my wife off like the first time we had sex. Lately she just lays there and don’t make sounds. I have ask her what can I due different to make her cum. I love licking her pussy and lick her anal. I also love suckling her brest. She tells me she not in the mood for sex with me anymore. So what should I due because I getting bored playing with myself.


Ronnie Hyatt
September 8, 2018 at 16:50	| Reply
Great info! Kind information to the ladies though, please take care of your happy parts. No guy, even if he cares for you will ever give his all, or anything for that matter if you are not hygienic down there. Goes the same for the guys.


Axel and Laura
September 10, 2018 at 04:47	| Reply
Agreed Ronnie, personal hygiene is super important for a great sex life. Women might also want to watch out for certain foods that can make them smell not so nice downstairs.


Adam
October 13, 2018 at 16:36	| Reply
I do have a question I will lick her clit and she says she loves but after abit she will start to (I hope I’m spelling this right) writhe but then she always wants me to stop because she says it tickles too much and she cant stand it we will switch from oral and switch to sex mostly her on bottom because she loves me on top I know I lack in so much experience but if it tickles am I going it wrong?


Dos
January 11, 2019 at 03:10	| Reply
Very interesting


Eyong levis
February 15, 2019 at 09:40	| Reply
Nice, thankz, what i have been looking for


Ojay
March 14, 2019 at 14:31	| Reply
My woman wants a suck on her but it gets me irritated doing so… How do I start, judging from other smelly past experience with girls. Tnx


Angelo Rafael
March 25, 2019 at 07:55	| Reply
its really interesting. i have been doing this for quite a time now and even though my woman enjoys it, i still want her to crave for it often by . thanks Laura


Anonymous
May 12, 2019 at 03:08	| Reply
it feels so good but what if you don’t squirt


Gerry
May 14, 2019 at 18:02	| Reply
Great tips!!! You girls almost have me cumming thinking how bad you like your pussys being pleasured!!!


Solthyo
May 21, 2019 at 13:13	| Reply
Pls reading this is really confusing to me, do u have a video I can use to understand eating pussy better?


Anonymous
June 6, 2019 at 05:23	| Reply
I want a girl who loves her pussy licked sucked naughty but no where to be found .


Anonymous
June 14, 2019 at 03:12	| Reply
I always want my pussy eaten


Chris
June 11, 2019 at 07:41	| Reply
Thanks Laura… I love vagina licking so much.. the smell of it just gets me going. I have tried all these tips on my partner and it works great. She just loves my tongue inside her… She splits her leg wide apart so that my tongue can actually go deeper… Lots and lots of orgasms fill my mouth and unexpected squirts just sprays my face clean. But I am mad on vagina and it’s really makes us wild when I go for tongue fucking deep in her vagina.


Daniel
June 15, 2019 at 17:51	| Reply
Hi all girls here. I’m a man that’s trying to learn something. If u are afraid to talk to your bf about that don’t, most of the men like myself are willing to learn anything to make their girlfriends to have unforgettable orgasms It is just something that we want to to for our gf. I’ve met my girl about 3 months ago although I am inexperienced I have successfully give her 3 orgasms the first time we had sex which felt great for her and me however I haven’t made her squirt which is something I want to do so she can have best orgasms with me that’s why I’m on this site.
So if you are afraid to tell you bf about this site don’t be they would love to learn the methods to make u squirt.

No matter how old you are, you can always learn a thing or two when it comes to sex. More specifically, oral sex. Today I’m going to show you how to lick pussy like a true champion.

By the time you’re done with her vagina. She will be unable to walk, talk or function like a normal human being for at least 30 minutes after.

So listen up, because these oral techniques are boom diggity.

Quick note: If you’re struggling to get your girl to orgasm and you’re in need of desperate help, then you need to read this. You won’t regret it.

Below you will find a set of instructions followed by some useful tips on how to eat pussy like a sex god. I suggest you read both multiple times and practice as much as you can:

#1: MAKE SURE SHE’S COMFORTABLE
Step 1: Get Her Comfortable
Comfort is very important for all women.

Women want to feel comfortable, secure and wanted. When you can make her feel those things in your presence, she’ll be able to cum a lot quicker.

The environment you’re in has a huge impact on whether she will be able to fully relax and let go. If you’re at her place, then all you need to do is be gentle and caring because the surroundings are familiar.

If however, you’re in your home/apartment, then you need to work a little more to make her feel happy and safe. Get the mood lighting right, check the temperature of the room is neutral, your bed sheets should be clean, alcohol can be a great relaxant and maybe even a few candles (girls love candles).

Music is POWERFUL also, so use it to your advantage. Find some chill out music on Spotify or YouTube and let it run in the background to give a relaxed vibe in the room.

Everything above is basic I know, but you’d be shocked at just how many men have problems keeping their home inviting to women.

#2: TURN HER ON, BUILD UP THE TENSION
Step 2: Build Up Tension
Think dial, not switch.

I’ve said this time and time again. Women are like dials, not switches. You need to turn them on and gradually let the tension build until she’s super horny. So before you can even go down on her, turn her on.

There are several ways to turn a girl on which I won’t go into detail her. But some general tips would be; kiss her neck, grab her bum, slowly undress her, suck on her nipples, rub her pussy whilst her knickers are still on.

Foreplay might seem like a chore, but I can assure you, the better you get at foreplay, the easier it will be to get her to cum from oral.

#3: SUCK, LICK, RUB, BLOW
Step 3: Suck, Lick, Rub, Blow
The magical formula.

Never start with the clit. This is a mistake a lot of guys make. You need to build up to the clit and then stay there until she orgasms, but don’t jump straight to it. Think of it as the final piece of the puzzle.

Kiss around her vagina first, inner thighs are a great erogenous zone. Stop over her vagina and breathe slowly, so she can feel your warm breath. This will increase her anticipation.

Begin slowly licking the labia minora (lips) for a minute or so. She should be groaning, wriggling and grabbing your hair. Listen to her body if she’s not telling you what she wants verbally (which most women won’t).

After a few minutes, then start working on the clit. Softly kiss her clitoris, lick it and suck it. You need to lubricate that little wondrous marble.

Now things are in full swing and she should be on her way to orgasming. Don’t stop there though, move back down to her lips, let your saliva and her pussy juice make a slippery lube for her pussy.

#4: DON’T YOU DARE STOP, DAMMIT
Step 4: Don't Ever Stop
The golden rule.

There will be two types of communication from your girl during your oral session. Verbal and nonverbal. However non-verbal will be the most prominent.

When she squirms, bites her lip, moans, groans, grabs your head, moves her hips, grabs the bed sheets, says things like “fuuuuuck”, that means you keep doing what you’re doing and DO NOT STOP.

Also, stay at the same speed/rhythm. You don’t need to go super fast or slow, just keep the same pace until she cums. If you change things up, she’ll find it harder to climax.

#5: USE A FINGER (OR TWO) IF YOU WANT
Step 5: Use A Finger
Always use your fingers.

The mouth isn’t your only tool. You could and should use a finger, heck, use two fingers. Whilst your mouth is on her clit, insert your index finger and slowly slide it into her vagina, use the backwards stroking method to stimulate her g-spot.

See what’s happening here? You’re stimulating her clit and her g-spot like some sort of cunnilingus mouth wizard. She will be gasping for air at this point because it feels so freakin good.

If you’re feeling brave. Use two fingers and thank me later.

So that’s it. Clear instructions on how to eat that pussy like a pro.

Now onto the positions…

PUSSY LICKING POSITIONS
Sit on my face! – Feeling a bit daring? Ask her to sit on your face. This will get her seriously turned on as she can ride your face. Super horny for both of you.
On all fours – Get her on all fours and lick her pussy whilst you’re on all fours also. This will definitely feel kinkier than the normal position.
The old fashioned way – If you’re vanilla and like it old school, then just keep her laying in the missionary position and go to town on her puss.
Now let’s look at some useful tips you should be taking note of, to further make your girl understand she’s dealing with a bedroom ninja.

QUICK TIPS FOR BETTER CUNNILINGUS
Cunnilingus Tips
Mastery level.

Be clean shaven or go full bush – Short stubble HURTS women. Imagine your girl tugging your plonker off with sandpaper, that’s how it feels when you lick her out and your chin is stubbly. It’s going to really scratch and burns. So either be clean shaven or let the beard grow so it’s soft.
Make sure your hands are warm – Warm hands are essential. There’s nothing worse than cold hands touching your private parts. It kills the mood.
Tell her you love her pussy (taste/smell/visual) – Women like hearing that they have a pretty pussy, that it smells good, that she tastes amazing, it turns them on and makes them feel sexy. So do just that, but don’t over do it. Once or twice is fine.
Ask her what she likes most – This should go without saying, but, all women are different! Dun dun duuuuun. Ask what she wants and do that, simple.
Here are some other useful tips.

YOUR PUSSY EATING CHECKLIST
If you’re short on time, just use the following checklist as often as you can and trust me when I say… this is the best advice you will get on eating pussy.

